---
title: 'Peony: Pretty and Powerful'
description: Peonies are prized today for their stunning blooms, but they also have
  a rich medicinal legacy spanning over 2,000 years in Europe and Asia. This story
  uncovers lesser-known episodes in peony’s history, including its use in healing
  remedies like a “miraculous” infant convulsion powder.
author: Ashley Buchanan
date: 2021-05-24
permalink: /peony
tags: flower ornamental temperate
published: true
media_subpath: /assets/posts/peony
image:
  path: wc:Smith_-_Chinese_Tree_Peony_(Paeonia_suffruticosa)_-_1939.288_-_Cleveland_Museum_of_Art.jpg
juncture: true
---


# The Secret Ingredient

In 1735, a Viennese baroness wrote to the last Medici princess, [Anna Maria Luisa de Medici (1669—1743)](Q233181), to thank her for sending a miraculous infant convulsion powder. Anna Maria Luisa’s recipe for infant convulsion powder contained a precipitation of a human skull (of "a man who died violently but was never buried"), a precipitation of "Oriental pearls," a [precipitation](Q113796) of red coral and white coral, as well as yellow amber and [peony](Q147105) roots and seeds. While the more outrageous ingredients—the skull and Oriental pearls—stand out, it was actually the use of [peony](img1/zoomto/901,1073,847,637) that made Anna Maria Luisa’s powder effective.

{% include embed/image.html id="img1" src="IMG_1325.JPG" caption="Archivio di Stato di Firenze (ASF), Miscellanea Medicea (MM) 1, ins. 2, fol. 186r." aspect="1.33" %}

In her letter to Anna Maria Luisa, the baroness praised the powder’s effectiveness, stating that the children she treated with it had been so violently taken by convulsions that the attending physicians had "given up on them." Not only had the "miraculous powder" cured the children, but they remained in perfect health several months later. Well known for her miraculous powder, Anna Maria Luisa strategically distributed it to influential individuals and courts across Europe. As a result, she created valuable socio-political alliances to protect [The Grand Duchy of Tuscany](Q154849) as the end of the Medici dynasty neared.

node,1,Maria Dorothea von Metternich Angelelli,wc:Bernhard_Albrecht_Moll_His_Crippled_Sister_Eleonore.jpg
node,Q233181,Anna Maria Luisa de' Medici,wc:Anna_Maria_Luisa_de%27_Medici_%281667-1743%29.jpg
node,2,Pietro Neri Lorenzo,wc:249-Karl_Envallsson-Svenska_teatern_1.jpg
edge,1,Q233181,received portions of and persmission to distribute the infant convulsion powder of
edge,1,2,married to
edge,2,Q233181,informant of
node,Q2399148,Maria Vittoria of Savoy,wc:Bernhard_Albrecht_Moll_His_Crippled_Sister_Eleonore.jpg
edge,Q2399148,Q233181,received infant convulsion powder from
node,Q2254102,Victor Amadeus,wc:Vittorio_Amedeo_I_of_Savoy1.jpg
edge,Q2399148,Q2254102,married to
node,Q7738,Louis XV, King of France,wc:LouisXV-Rigaud1FXD.jpg
edge,Q2254102,Q7738,was the master of ceremonies at the court of
node,Q439144,Cardinal Fluery,wc:Cardinal_de_Fleury_by_Rigaud.jpg
edge,Q2399148,had a close relationship with
node,Q455392,"Louis Henri, Duke of Bourbon",wc:After_Pierre_Gobert_-_Louis_Henri_of_Bourbon%2C_Prince_of_Cond%C3%A9.png
edge,Q2399148,had a close relationship with
edge,Q439144,Q7738,served as the chief minister to
edge,Q455392,Q7738,was related to and served as prime minister to
node,3,Johanna Isabella von Bouscheidt,wc:Bernhard_Albrecht_Moll_His_Crippled_Sister_Eleonore.jpg
edge,3,Q233181,received infant convulsion powder from
node,4,Caspar Franz Edmund von Bourscheidt,wc:249-Karl_Envallsson-Svenska_teatern_1.jpg	married to
edge,3,4,married to
node,Q62594,"Charles III Philip, Elector Palatine",wc:Karl_Philipp%2C_Kurf%C3%BCrst_%281716-1742%29.jpg
edge,4,Q62594,member of the court of
node,5,Baroness Massimiliana von Moltke,wc:Bernhard_Albrecht_Moll_His_Crippled_Sister_Eleonore.jpg
edge,5,Q233181,received portions of and persmission to distribute the infant convulsion powder of
node,Q150665,Charles VI,wc:Retrat_de_Carles_III_davant_el_port_de_Barcelona%2C_Frans_van_Stampart.jpg
edge,5,Q150665,member of the court of
{: #aml-network-csv }

{% include embed/vis-network.html id="aml-network" caption="Anna Maria Luisa de Medici’s Network." aspect="1" %}

# The Popularity of Peonies

Peonies are not typically associated with medicine, since they have long been coveted for their beauty. In fact, [peonies](Q147105) were first cultivated for their attractiveness and fragrance in China more than 1,400 years ago and became especially popular under the [Tang Dynasty](Q9683) (618–907 CE). In the Tang imperial gardens, tree (or moutan) peonies reigned as the "king of flowers" and symbolized happiness, wealth, and prosperity. We can see the association of peonies with wealth and class in a rare Tang scroll painting that depicts five ladies of the court and one maidservant. The rank and prestige of each [lady](img2/zoomto/3599,-267,2284,1914) is shown by their scale relative to one another as well as by the lavish [peonies](img2/zoomto/2737,1,617,535) that adorn their hair. As the popularity of peonies grew in China, so too did their varieties, as horticulturalists selected, hybridized, bred, and eventually grafted peonies for their fragrance, petal color, petal number, and size.[^1]

{% include embed/image.html id="img2" src="wc:Zhou_Fang._Court_Ladies_Wearing_Flowered_Headdresses._(46x180)_Liaoning_Provincial_Museum,_Shenyang..jpg" caption="Zhou Fang, Court Ladies Adorning Their Hair with Flowers, late 8th–early 9th century CE, Liaoning Provincial Museum, Wikimedia Commons, public domain" aspect="4.68" %}

The center of imperial peony cultivation was in [Luoyang](map1/flyto/34.62403534924385,112.45364263955301,12), where there were peony festivals and competitions, gardens devoted solely to peonies, and even a peony research center. This led to a plethora of ornamental peony cultivars as peony breeding became an artform. More than 200 peony cultivars were described during the [Song Dynasty](map1/flyto/30.54077926679056,112.8122076655154,5) (960–1279 CE); today, China has more than 1,000 cultivars.

{% include embed/image.html src="img1_1_4.jpg" source="https://theme.npm.edu.tw/exh105/npm_anime/TwelveMonths/common/images/selection/img1_1_4.jpg" aspect="0.57" %}
{% include embed/map.html id="map1" center="Q187136" zoom="4" geojson="Song.json~The Song dynasty at its greatest extent in 1111 AD." %}

While peonies have a long history of appreciation and cultivation as ornamental garden plants in Chinese as well as [Islamic gardens](Q3114508), in western Europe they mainly were valued for their utility. Over the course of the sixteenth century that changed, when [Ottoman](Q12560) floriculture introduced numerous ornamental flowers to the gardens of Europe, including hyacinths, narcissi, peonies, and most famously, [tulips](Q219217).[^2] It was not until the end of the eighteenth century, that Europeans would begin intensively breeding ornamental peonies.

{% include embed/image.html src="si-FS-7258_37.jpg" aspect="0.69" %}

In 1789, famed British naturalist [Sir Joseph Banks](Q153408) acquired a "moutan peony tree" (_[Paeonia lactiflora](Q163076)_, left) from Canton, China, through his connections with the [British East India Company](Q83164). Surviving the arduous journey to Britain, it was planted in the Royal Botanic Garden, Kew. Other peonies from China soon followed, ushering in something of a peony craze in Europe as, thanks to centuries of cultivation, Chinese peonies were larger, fuller, and more fragrant than native European varieties. Peonies became increasingly popular as French, English, and American horticulturists began developing ornamental varieties of their own from these exotic imported peony cultivars.[^3]

{% include embed/image-compare.html before="linn-hs959-3.jpg" after="bm000628767.jpg" class="right" %}

As a Chinese botanical export, eastern ornamental peonies, as well as the new herbaceous and tree hybrids created from them in Europe, carried connotations of the "exotic Orient" and became a popular subject in nineteenth-century art. The depiction of peonies in nineteenth-century French paintings, however, does more than simply signify the exotic or differentiate [Occident](Q160381) and [Orient](Q205653).[^4] For example, in [Frédéric Bazille’s](Q207298) _Young Woman with Peonies_, the foreign provenance of ornamental peonies is emphasized by the Black model who arranges the blooms in an ["Oriental" vase](img3/zoomto/22,583,979,821). Noteably, Bazille pairs the peonies with [irises](img3/zoomto/138,0,979,821), France’s national flower. Once new and exotic, ornamental peony cultivars had become a product of cultural hybridity, simultaneously signaling the plant’s eastern origin as well as the new varieties that were being developed in France.[^5] 

{% include embed/image.html id="img3" src="wc:Bazille,_Négresse_aux_pivoines.JPG" caption="Frédéric Bazille, Young Woman with Peonies, 1870, Musée Fabre, Wikimedia Commons, CC BY-SA 3.0" aspect="1.26" %}

Today, peonies remain one of the most sought-after ornamental flowers in the world. Thanks to their abundant delicate petals, peonies often adorn gardens and homes, and are popular for wedding bouquets and floral arrangements. While peonies have long been, and continue to be, a coveted ornamental plant, what may surprise you is that they also have an equally long history—over two millennia—as a powerful medicinal therapeutic.

{% include embed/image.html src="wc:Camille_Pissarro_-_Bouquet_of_pink_Peonies_-_Ashmolean_Museum.jpg" caption="Camille Pissarro, A Bouquet of Pink Peonies, 1873, Ashmolean Museum, Wikimedia Commons, public domain" region="0,124,1084,909" aspect="0.81" %}

# Shaoyao: The Medicine Made from Peony

Peony is the single genus in the [Paeoniaceae](Q3360397) family, which has about 30 species found in western North America, northwest Africa, and temperate Eurasia. China, with 15 species, 10 of which are endemic, is the center of the family’s bio-geographic distribution.

{% include embed/map.html center="41.17816,84.50213" zoom="1.5" geojson="peony.json~Peony Distribution" %}

Two species of _Paeonia_ were particularly important in ancient Chinese medical practice, _[Paeonia lactiflora](Q163076)_, which was the primary source of both white peony and red peony, and _[Paeonia suffruticosa](Q163018)_, commonly known as the tree peony or moutan. The earliest record of the use of peony in Chinese medicine was discovered in an imperial Chinese Han tomb (25–220 CE). Writings within the tomb tell that peony root (called "danpi"), likely _P. suffruticosa_, was used to treat blood stasis nearly 2,000 years ago.[^6]

{% include embed/image.html src="10.5555_al.ap.specimen.m0153623.jpg" aspect="0.66" %}
{% include embed/image.html src="10.5555_al.ap.specimen.k000687216.jpg" aspect="0.62" %}

In 1644, and a testament to peony’s long history as an important medicinal simple, a high [Ming](Q9903) illustrated [herbal](Q6165948), _Bencao tupu_ 本草圖譜, beautifully depicted _P. lactiflora_, also known as common Chinese garden peony. _P. lactiflora_ is the source of both red and white Chinese garden peony and both were (and remain) important medicinal herbs in traditional Chinese medicine. According to the herbal, _P. lactiflora_ was used to treat gynecological symptoms including hot flashes and irregular menstrual cycles. It was also used in the treatment of high blood pressure and inflammation.[^7] The compound Chinese characters for white peony, "Shaoyao," and the variant for red peony, "Hongyao," (written in the top right corner of the illustration) reveal the plant’s importance in medicine. The first character of both, "shao" and "hong," refer to the peony plant, while the second character "yao" means medicine. And so, both mean "the medicine made from peony."[^8]

{% include embed/image.html src="wc:Ming_herbal_(painting);_Chinese_herbaceous_peony_Wellcome_L0039426.jpg" caption="Ming herbal (painting): Chinese herbaceous peony" aspect="0.67" %}

# Peony in Western Medicine

Peony has an equally long history of medicinal use in Europe. In his herbal, _[de Materia Medica](Q3704131)_, the Greek physician [Dioscorides](Q297776) identified two types of peonies used in medicine: the male and female peony. Today these are identified as _[Paeonia mascula](Q161482)_ and _[Paeonia officinalis](Q159738)_, respectively. According to [Pietro Andrea Mattioli’s](Q457191) 16th century commentary on _de Materia Medica_, Dioscorides prescribed giving the dry root of _P. officinalis_ to women to provoke menstruation (an [emmenagogue](Q2602077)) and to treat kidney and bladder discomfort, among several other gynecological ailments. The Roman naturalist, [Pliny the Elder](Q82778), also recommended _P. officinalis_ for "female diseases," stating, ["One great remedy for all female diseases in common, is the black seed of the herbaceous plant pæonia."](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/text?doc=urn:cts:latinLit:phi0978.phi001.perseus-eng1:26.90) 

{% include embed/image.html src="gri_33125014246561_1145.jpg" caption="Mattioli, i discorsi, pg. 964" aspect="0.75" %}
{% include embed/image.html src="gri_33125014246561_1146.jpg" caption="Mattioli, i discorsi, pg. 965" aspect="0.71" %}

In addition to the cleansing and purgative properties associated with peony and women’s health, the Roman physician [Galen](Q8778) recommended tying peony root [around the necks](img4/zoomto/96,233,462,408) of children as an effective remedy for "the falling sickness," which was a common pre-modern phrase for [epilepsy](Q41571).[^9] Throughout the middle ages, peony was used as a medicinal simple for the treatment of epilepsy or convulsions. For example, the female medieval healer and Benedictine abbess, [Hildegard von Bingen (1098—1179)](Q70991) instructed "When one falls with epilepsy, place in his mouth [peony] while he lies there, and do this every time he falls with this disease, and he will be finally cured."[^10] In addition to treating epilepsy, fits, and convulsions, peony was also used as a cure for lunacy and sciatica.

{% include embed/image.html id="img4" src="5af078d29f16830e265eff7ab2beb33959557f6bc7607878276736a371c0dc527785d8dab0f055dbe9e7baef178eb98222c3bd5c3f1c.jpg" caption="Curing lunacy with spring of peony and sciatica with peony root" aspect="0.70" %}

[European printed herbals](Q6165948) of the sixteenth century continued to prescribe peony for seizures and epilepsy. While many of these herbals referenced Galen’s recommendation to tie the root around the necks of children, they also prescribed more powerful peony therapeutics in the form of distilled waters, powders, syrups, and compound medicines to be taken internally. For example, [Castore Durante’s](Q205031) popular 1585 Italian herbal described how distilled water of female peony root and flowers relieved children who suffered from "[mal caduco](Q41571)" (epilepsy or seizures). He also noted that it benefited apoplectics and paralytics as well. Similarly, in his 1597 herbal, English naturalist [John Gerard](Q1333338) noted that a syrup made from peony ["helpeth greatly the falling sickness, likewise the extraction of the rootes doth the same."](https://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/pageimage/51906362)

{% include embed/image.html src="herbarionuouo00dura_0357.jpg" caption="Durante, pg. 341" aspect="0.68" %}
{% include embed/image.html src="gri_33125012606592_1023.jpg" caption="Gerard, pg. 980" aspect="0.72" %}

# Nature’s Pharmaceuticals

For more than 2,000 years, numerous peony species were used as a powerful herbal therapeutic across societies in Europe and Asia. [Herbal medicine](Q861699) in the western tradition, however, changed dramatically over the course of the late-eighteenth and nineteenth centuries as European chemists, botanists, and physicians began favoring the creation of standardized and systematic medical experimentation to assess the efficacy of plant medicines and identify and isolate their active chemical compounds. This led to an emphasis on the individual organic compounds within plants and the organic chemical synthesis of these compounds to produce more effective drugs. It also marked the birth of modern pharmaceuticals, many of which are derived or synthetic analogues of naturally occurring chemical structures. The ability to isolate, purify, and synthesize chemical structures created [highly efficacious and powerful drugs](Q507443). And so, herbal simples and compound herbal medicines were replaced and increasingly viewed as outdated, crude, ineffectual, and, in some cases, even dangerous.

{% include embed/iframe.html src="https://cdn.knightlab.com/libs/timeline3/latest/embed/index.html?source=1kjtI9t7HgoZRiDeDyGjXXabVm2b3nZqTYFxnmxQUFFI&timenav-position=bottom&hash-bookmark=false&initial-zoom=1" height="650px" class="full" %}

Despite modern western medicine tending to dismiss early therapeutics like Anna Maria Luisa de Medici’s infant convulsion powder, numerous scientific studies on several species of peony used medically in East Asia have revealed isolated compounds that possess anti-tumor, anti-oxidant, anti-inflammatory, hepatoprotective, and anti-diabetic properties.[^11] Peony roots and flowers continue to be used as a medicinal simple in [Traditional Chinese](Q200253) and [Ayurvedic](Q132325) medicine. While fewer studies have been conducted on European species of peony used medicinally, several studies have tested for the bioactive compounds responsible for _P. officinalis’s_ effect on seizures.

{% include embed/image.html src="wl-L0038032.jpg" caption="Theory of diseases treated with decoction of Radix Puerariae, Wellcome Collection." aspect="0.67" %}

One such study conducted in 1991 on the water extract of _P. officinalis_ concluded that there are several chemical compounds found in the root, including [paeoniflorin](Q7124104), albiflorin, oxypaeoniflorin, and gallotannins, which have documented anticonvulsant properties.[^12] And, when isolated, the compounds albiflorin and gallotannin were proven to block extracellular calcium, which is linked to intracellular seizure-related phenomena. Paeoniflorin fractions also showed inhibition, but to a weaker extent. Another study, which administered peony root extract (from _P. officinalis_) to rats, concluded that it was "a potent in vitro inhibitor of neuron damage in the CA1 area of the hippocampus."[^13] The study also determined that peony root extract had protective effects on damaged neurons as well as anticonvulsant action when administered orally.[^14] And so, the early administration of anti-epileptic drugs has the potential to [alter the long-term course of epilepsy](https://www.jstor.org/stable/29726099) with the possibility of preventing it from becoming an "intractable disorder."

{% include embed/image.html src="Peony_compounds.jpg" caption="Chemical structures of main components in total glucosides of peony." attribution="He DY, Dai SM. Anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory effects of paeonia lactiflora pall., a traditional chinese herbal medicine. _Front Pharmacol_. 2011;2:10. Published 2011 Feb 25. doi:10.3389/fphar.2011.00010" aspect="1.25" %}

Today’s primary approach to treating epilepsy and suppressing seizures is to alter the neural network’s excitability or inhibition by regulating chemical compounds such as sodium and calcium. Drugs like [ethosuximide](Q421567), for example, reduce abnormal electrical activity in the brain by regulating calcium influx in cells. As a result, contemporary western medicine has little motivation to further investigate the peony root’s similar biochemical compounds or potential pharmaceutical applications. This lack of current interest, however, does not make the biochemical activity of peony insignificant historically. The identification of active biochemical compounds suggest that Anna Maria Luisa de Medici’s powder might have actually improved the health of the children who received it!

{% include embed/image.html src="Calcium-Channel-Blocker.jpg" caption="Treating diseased brain cells with calcium channel blockers" attribution="University of Bristol" aspect="1.25" %}

The seeming effectiveness of her infant convulsion powder increased Anna Maria Luisa’s socio-political influence. In fact, several letters preserved in the Florence State Archive attest to the powder’s efficacy and popularity. One, from the Viennese baroness, asks Anna Maria Luisa for additional portions of powder given the "extraordinary effects they had on three children from the most important families of Vienna." Anna Maria Luisa replied that she would send the baroness as much of the powder as she desired to distribute to her friends, considering that she had "put the powder to such good use."

{% include embed/map.html center="47.61128698661441,8.433186816910375" zoom="5" caption="Recipients of Anna Maria Luisa’s Infant Convulsion Powder" geojson="AML_distribution.json~Distribution of Anna Maria Luisa’s Infant Convulsion Powder" %}

The gift of "miraculous" medicine to the Viennese court was not simply altruistic. As a woman, Anna Maria Luisa was barred from inheriting and ruling Tuscany on the death of her brother, the [last Medici Grand Duke](img5/zoomto/1061,479,736,629). Although she lacked official power, Anna Maria Luisa fashioned influence through the gift of her infant convulsion powder, which allowed her to ingratiate herself with some of [Vienna’s most important and powerful families](img5/zoomto/214,581,1271,955). This ensured goodwill and communication between the Grand Duchy of Tuscany and the court that would decide its fate. By the end of the Medici dynasty, the Viennese court was the headquarters of the Habsburg dynasty and the center of its imperial politics. In 1737, [Francis of Lorraine](Q151075), future head of the [Holy Roman Empire](Q12548), which controlled much of Europe at this time, became the Grand Duke of Tuscany and ruled Florence from the imperial court in Vienna—a court much indebted to Anna Maria Luisa de Medici’s infant convulsion powder and the power of peony.

{% include embed/image.html id="img5" src="Line_of_Sucession_for_the_Grand_Duchy_of_Tuscany.jpg" aspect="1.33" %}

---

[^1]: Zhou Shi-Liang et al., "Multiple species of wild tree peonies gave rise to the ‘king of flowers’, _Paeonia suffruticosa_ Andrews," _Proceedings: Biological Sciences_ 281, no. 1797  (December 2014): 1–8.
[^2]: John H. Harvey, "Turkey as a Source of Garden Plants," _Garden History_ 4, no. 3 (1976): 21–42. Accessed March 25, 2021. [doi:10.2307/1586521.](https://www.jstor.org/stable/1586521)
[^3]: Richard Zhang, "King of Flowers: Reinterpretation of Chinese Peonies in Early Modern Europe," _Journal of the Southern Association for the History of Medicine and Science_, 3, no. 1 (2021), [https://journals.troy.edu/index.php/JSAHMS/.](https://journals.troy.edu/index.php/JSAHMS/)
[^4]: Linda Nochlin, "The Imaginary Orient," _Art in America_ 71, no. 5 (1983): 118–191.
[^5]: Homi K. Bhabha, "On ‘hybridity’ and ‘moving beyond’" in _Art in Theory, 1900-2000: An Anthology of Changing Ideas_ (Malden, Mass.: Blackwell Publishers, 2003).
[^6]: M. Zhao and S.P. Wu, "A Review of the Ethnobotany, Phytochemistry and Pharmacology of Tree Peony (Sect. Moutan)" _South African Journal of Botany_ 124 (2019): 556–563, [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sajb.2019.05.018.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sajb.2019.05.018)
[^7]: Sarah E. Edwards, _Phytopharmacy: An Evidence-based Guide to Herbal Medicinal Products_ (Chichester, England: Wiley Blackwell, 2015).
[^8]: Subhuti Dharmananda, "White Peony, Red Peony, and Moutan: Three Chinese Herbs Derived from Paeonia," [http://www.itmonline.org/arts/peony.htm#figure%201.](http://www.itmonline.org/arts/peony.htm#figure%201)
[^9]: Graeme Tobyn, Alison Denham, and Margaret Whitelegg, _The Western Herbal Tradition: 2000 Years of Medicinal Plant Knowledge_ (Edinburgh, New York: Elsevier, 2011).
[^10]: Priscilla Throop, "Peony," in Hildegard Von Bingen’s _Physica: The Complete English Translation of Her Classic Work on Health and Healing_ (Rochester, Vt.: Healing Arts Press, 1998).
[^11]: M. Zhao and S.P. Wu.
[^12]: E. Sugaya and A. Sugaya, "Cellular physiology of epileptogenic phenomena and its application to therapy against intractable epilepsy," _Comp Biochem Physiol C_ 98 no. 1 (1991): 249–270.
[^13]: Shamim Sahranavard, Saeedeh Ghafari, and Mahmoud Mosaddegh, "Medicinal plants used in Iranian traditional medicine to treat epilepsy," _Seizure_ 23, no. 5 (2014): 328–332.
[^14]: Tadashi Tsuda et al., "Protective Effects of Peony Root Extract and Its Components on Neuron Damage in the Hippocampus Induced by the Cobalt Focus Epilepsy Model," _Experimental Neurology_ 146 no. 2 (1997): 518–525.
