---
title: Ahoy
description: Mobile game that offers simple yet challenging gameplay mechanics, vibrant visuals, and a charming aesthetic that appeals to players of all ages.
author: [sanchit]
date: 2024-04-04
categories: [Gaming]
tags: [Mobile Game, Puzzle, Adventure]
pin: true
image:
  path: /assets/04-04-2024/3.png
  alt: Ahoy Game Logo
---

# Ahoy : Boat and Conundrum

**Age:** Born 2024, Q1 


**Platform:** [Get it on Google Play](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=in.caffeinism.ahoy)

---
# Turn-Based Strategy Game

In this turn-based strategy game, you step into the shoes of Captain Blackwood and engage in strategic puzzle-solving, where you are challenged to collect all the treasures scattered across the island shores.

## Gameplay

- Navigate grid-based levels.
- Avoid islands.
- Collect all treasures.
- Utilize other gameplay elements.
- Each level presents new challenges and requires careful planning.

## Visual Style

- Minimalist design.
- Beautifully crafted environments.
- Emoji-like characters.

## Objective

As Captain Blackwood, your goal is to eliminate targets while avoiding guards and other hazards.
Each level has specific objectives, such as assassinating a target or reaching an exit point.

## Turn-Based Movement

You move Captain Blackwood’s Aether Voyager one step at a time, planning your route carefully.

## Obstacles and Interactions

- Levels feature various elements like treasures, armored treasures, and distractions.
- There is only one correct way to solve the puzzle, and it’s not so obvious.

## Disclaimer

We do not have any ads in this build, nor do we track you personally to sell your data. But if you like the first few levels, please buy the game to support further development.
## Video

{% include embed/youtube.html id='zmjtnhzDOBQ' %}


---

## About the Developer
I'm Sanchit Gulati, the sole developer behind this game. This project marks the beginning of what I hope will be a collection of diverse products, perhaps even more games, all geared towards fueling my morning coffee and indulging in freshly baked croissants.
