---
title: 'Arabica Coffee: Cultivating Connection and Climate Resilience'
description: From its Ethiopian forest origins to global coffeehouses, Arabica coffee
  shaped commerce, culture, and community as it spread through trade and empire. Today
  the industry faces climate-driven threats—heat, pests, disease, and price shocks—spurring
  solutions from agroforestry and relocation to breeding climate-resilient varieties
  and coordinating conservation of wild Coffea genetics.
author: Nina Foster
date: 2025-09-29
permalink: /coffee
tags: beverage stimulant tropical high-altitude shrub tree
published: true
featured: true
media_subpath: /assets/posts/coffee
image:
  path: wc:Coffee_berries_in_Hacienda_Guayabal%2C_Colombia.jpg
juncture: true
---

Coffee is one of the world’s most important agricultural commodities, supporting the livelihoods of an estimated 125 million people.[^1] With more than 120 species in the genus *Coffea*, one in particular has dominated global production, trade, and consumption, and is prized for its impeccable cup quality: Arabica coffee (*Coffea arabica*). The plant historically accounted for at least two-thirds of the world’s coffee production, though the second-most cultivated coffee species, robusta (*Coffea canephora*), is on the rise.[^2]

{% include embed/image.html src="wc:Coffee_plant_(Coffea_arabica);_flowering_and_fruiting_stem_w_Wellcome_V0044270.jpg" caption="*Coffea arabica* branch. Hand-colored engraving by J. Miller, c. 1774, after S. Taylor. From John Ellis' *An Historical Account of Coffee*. Wellcome Collection via Wikimedia Commons." aspect="0.82" %}

Endemic to the highlands of Ethiopia, southeastern Sudan, and northern Kenya, Arabica coffee thrives in humid, montane forests in tropical areas.[^3] Glossy, evergreen leaves adorn the tree’s branches, and clusters of small white flowers give way to oval, fleshy fruits, each containing the two pale seeds we call coffee beans. Through networks of trade and conquest, the plant has traveled across the tropics, where conditions are ideal for coffee cultivation. Today, Brazil, Colombia, and Ethiopia rank among the leading producers of the crop.[^4]

{% include embed/image.html src="coffee-belt.png" caption="Map of the tropics, where conditions are ideal for coffee cultivation. Nina Foster, ArcGIS." aspect="1.38" %}

Arabica became an agent of connection and community building where it was grown and, further down the supply chain, where it was consumed. Coffeehouses have served as centers of intellectual and cultural exchange for centuries. Countless relationships have been sparked by the question, "Do you want to meet for coffee?" Between planting, harvesting, processing, milling, roasting, and every other step of production and distribution, coffee is touched by at least nine sets of hands before it reaches the consumer.[^5]

{% include embed/youtube.html vid="faTsRV7bkEc" caption="Coffee: From Farm to Cup" aspect="1.55" %}

Demand for coffee continues to grow, but the future of the industry is uncertain. In addition to concerns over price volatility and labor conditions on coffee farms, Arabica coffee is especially vulnerable to climate change and its associated impacts, such as rising temperatures, altered precipitation, and increased pressure from insect pests and plant pathogens. Researchers have proposed a number of solutions to protect the plant and other coffee species, each with unique benefits and challenges. These suggestions, if implemented thoughtfully and collaboratively by industry stakeholders, can help safeguard coffee production—and with it, the enduring legacy of a rich global history. 

{% include embed/image.html src="wc:Change_in_Average_Temperature_With_Fahrenheit.svg" caption="Global Warming, 1973-2023. NASA’s Scientific Visualization Studio via Wikimedia Commons." aspect="1.11" %}

# From Ethiopia to the World

The early years of coffee consumption are shrouded in mystery. Most coffee historians have encountered the legend about an Ethiopian goat herder named Kaldi, who noticed his livestock became more energetic after eating the fruits from a coffee plant.[^6] Intrigued, he tried the fruit for himself and felt a thrilling rush of vitality. As the story goes, Kaldi shared his findings with monks at a nearby monastery, initiating coffee’s rise to fame. 

{% include embed/youtube.html vid="BU-0e6OLIf0" caption="The Legend of Kaldi" aspect="1.55" %}

It is believed that Kaldi’s alleged discovery of coffee dates to the ninth century, but the earliest written record with any resemblance to the myth appears much later. Mehrej Ibn Nimrûm, a Maronite scholar and priest also known as Antonio Faustus Naironi or Banesius, was the first to reference the legend in his 1671 treatise on coffee’s history and virtues.[^7] Instead of Ethiopia, the story is set in Yemen, where Arabica arrived as early as the sixth century.[^8] Nimrûm describes a man who complained to monastics that his livestock—camels in some variations, goats in others—were "frisking and dancing" instead of sleeping.[^9] The head of the monastery purportedly visited the pasture and, after locating the fruits upon which the livestock fed, "resolved to try the virtues of these berries himself; thereupon, boiling them in water, and drinking thereof, he found by experience, it kept him awake in the night."[^10] He then told his fellow monks about the beverage, offering revitalization in their pursuit of the divine. 

{% include embed/iframe.html src="https://archive.org/details/bim_eighteenth-century_a-discourse-on-coffee-i_naironus-antonius-faust_1710/page/n9?view=theater" aspect="0.65" %}

The history of coffee solidifies around 1450, when [Sufi](Q9603) practitioners in Yemen reported using the beverage to aid their concentration in prayer.[^11] In the sixteenth century, the Ottoman state harnessed coffee cultivation to fill the gap created by the economic downfall of the Red Sea spice trade.[^12] A matrix of coffee trading posts developed in Yemen, including inland sites of cultivation, a wholesale market in the lowland city of Bayt al-Faqīh, and the ports of Mocha, al-Hudaydah, and al-Luhayyah. Merchants carried coffee beans across terrestrial routes and the Red Sea to the Hejaz, Cairo, the Levant, and Istanbul.

{% include embed/image.html src="wc:Kaffeplantage_i_Yemen.jpg" caption="A coffee plantation in Yemen, 1762. Drawing by Georg Wilhelm Baurenfeind. Danish State Archives via Wikimedia Commons." aspect=".64" %}

The Dutch East India Company introduced coffee cultivation to the Dutch colony of Java in the late seventeenth century. Using fresh coffee seeds obtained in the Yemeni port of Mocha, the Dutch raised a number of seedlings that would eventually populate the island’s coffee plantations.[^13] One tree was gifted to the Amsterdam Botanical Garden in 1706, and in 1718, the Dutch transported coffee plants from Amsterdam to Suriname, then known at Dutch Guiana.[^14] From there, coffee traveled to French Guiana and Brazil.

{% include embed/image.html src="wc:Plan_du_port_de_Mocha_au_Yemen_en_1737.jpg" caption="Map of the port of Mocha used by the French East India Company in 1737. Bibliothèque nationale de France via Wikimedia Commons." aspect="1.40" %}

The French colonial empire facilitated the passage of Arabica to the Caribbean. In 1720, French naval officer Gabriel de Clieu journeyed to the colony of Martinique with two coffee plants from Amsterdam, only one of which survived. In the decades that followed, coffee spread throughout the Caribbean islands. Several coffee plantations in European colonies relied on enslaved labor. In eighteenth-century Grenada, for example, enslaved people tended more than 12,000 acres of coffee properties.[^15]

{% include embed/iframe.html src="https://cdn.knightlab.com/libs/timeline3/latest/embed/index.html?source=v2%3A2PACX-1vT6Pi5o3k7Vtrj-UHyHwvY11Mw_QdQszuPBl-uMfPWou70UAv4QXTrHL_u9xFMILvZITzdMnDtHVwd0&font=Default&lang=en&initial_zoom=2&width=100%25" %}

# Coffeehouse Culture

As coffee dispersed via merchants and colonial powers, so did the establishment of coffeehouses. According to James Douglas, an eighteenth-century anatomist, botanist, and bibliophile, the first coffeehouse was founded in Mecca near the end of the fifteenth century.[^16] "Thither crowds of people resorted at all hours of the day, to enjoy the pleasure of conversation, play at chess and other games, dance, sing, and divert themselves all manner of ways, under the pretense of drinking coffee," he writes.[^17] These meeting places appeared wherever coffee was consumed, hosting lively exchanges of news, ideas, and political debates. Travelers who visited coffeehouses often left inspired and brought the custom back to their home countries.  

{% include embed/iframe.html src="https://archive.org/details/supplementtodesc1727doug/page/14?view=theater" aspect="0.65" %}

In some cities, the initial establishment of coffeehouses did not receive unanimous support. Authorities questioned the merits of these gathering spaces, condemning their associations with merry-making and disorder. In sixteenth-century Cairo, for instance, an imam employed his rhetoric against coffee and called its consumption unlawful. Douglas recounts, "His discourse had so great an effect on the mob who heard it, that, as soon as service was over, they went and pulled down all the coffeehouses that fell in their way, broke the pots and dishes, and maltreated the company they found in them."[^18] Coffee ultimately triumphed in court after a judge consulted an assembly of doctors, all of whom decided in favor of the beverage. The drink was redeemed by its delectable flavor and presumed medicinal benefits, said to "keep the body in good health," "quicken the spirits," and "make the heart lightsome."[^19]

{% include embed/image.html src="wc:Robert_Charles_Goff_-_Coffee_House_and_Mosque_Entrance,_Cairo_-_B1994.4.969_-_Yale_Center_for_British_Art.jpg" caption="*Coffee House and Mosque Entrance, Cairo* by Robert Charles Goff. Yale Center for British Art via Wikimedia Commons." aspect="1.42" %}

In seventeenth-century Europe, coffeehouses served as forums for the dissemination of Enlightenment culture. German social theorist Jürgen Habermas points to the English coffeehouse as "a public sphere that functioned in the political realm."[^20] Heads of state, such as England’s King Charles II, tried and failed to suppress the vibrant exchange of political news among coffeehouse clientele.[^21] Patrons continued to criticize their governments, authors gathered to discuss literature, and merchants and stockbrokers turned their tables into unofficial offices.

{% include embed/image.html src="wc:Interior_of_a_London_Coffee-house,_17th_century.JPG" caption="Interior of a London coffeehouse, 17th century. Wikimedia Commons." aspect="1.56" %}

Historian Brian Cowan summarizes the Habermasian view of the coffeehouse as "a novel unique and social space in which distinctions of rank were temporarily ignored and uninhibited debate on matters of political and philosophical interest flourished."[^22] But not all social distinctions were cast aside. Scholars have criticized the locales for only serving "prosperous middle-class Londoners" and excluding women from the debate and business transactions commonly associated with coffeehouse society.[^23] To compensate for this dismissal in the public domain, affluent women took to the private sphere to mirror such socializing and discourse. They gathered close acquaintances for daily or weekly coffee parties, which historian Wolfgang Schivelbusch deemed "a surrogate for the original coffeehouse created for male society."[^24]

{% include embed/image.html src="wc:François_Boucher_002.jpg" caption="*Le Dejeuner (Morning Coffee)* by François Boucher, 1739. Oil on canvas. Louvre Museum, Paris via Wikimedia Commons." aspect="1.81" %}

With the rise of industrialization in the eighteenth century, coffee became entangled with labor. As a stimulant, it was a "first-rate efficiency factor" that "promised nothing less than to lengthen and intensify the *time* available for work."[^25] Coffee enabled the working class to fend off drowsiness in favor of endurance and productivity. 

{% include embed/youtube.html vid="WD6cYabx0nk" caption="Coffee and Labor" aspect="1.55" %}

Today, coffee continues to power labor forces in diverse workplaces, from offices to farms and factories. Contemporary coffeehouses have come a long way from their earliest ancestors, with modern brewing equipment and fewer social limitations, but they embody many of the same virtues. John Frederick Frank’s 1947 poem "Coffee Hour" paints the coffeehouse as a community hub. It begins, "Society solidified: three old ladies / Sipping primly, facing friends."[^26] Centuries after Yemen’s initial cultivation of Arabica, the plant continues to connect us. 

{% include embed/image.html src="wc:Espresso_House_in_Torp_shopping_mall,_Uddevalla.jpg" caption="A modern-day coffeehouse in Uddevalla, Sweden. W. Carter via Wikimedia Commons." aspect="1.66" %}

# An Industry under Threat

Whether hot or iced, sweetened or plain, instant or the outcome of a patient brew, coffee is one of the most consumed beverages in the world. Approximately 2.3 billion cups of coffee are consumed daily, and global consumption is on the rise.[^27] But climate change is threatening the long-term security and stability of the industry. 

{% include embed/image.html src="wc:Manual_drip_(pour-over)_coffee.jpg" caption="Brewing coffee using the pour-over method. Kim Sanso via Wikimedia Commons." aspect="1.5" %}

Genetic diversity is key to climate resilience. Species with a diverse gene pool are more likely to possess traits that are well suited for survival and reproduction in an altered environment.[^28] Although Arabica coffee has an extensive range, its genetic diversity is severely limited. All of today’s cultivars are the descendants of two Arabica varieties that underwent successive reductions in genetic diversity as they radiated from Yemen.[^29] This homogeneity is exacerbated by the fact that Arabica tends to reproduce through self-fertilization, meaning it uses its own pollen instead of relying on other plants. Under a changing climate, cultivated coffee will struggle to adapt.

{% include embed/image.html src="wc:Coffee-farm-san-marcos-tarrazu-costa-rica.jpg" caption="Coffee farms in San Marcos, Costa Rica. Tarrazu via Wikimedia Commons." aspect="1.33" %}

The optimal growing conditions for Arabica coffee include temperatures between 57 and 79 degrees Fahrenheit, moderate rainfall, and an annual dry period of one to three months.[^30] These conditions will become harder to achieve in current coffee-growing regions as fossil fuel combustion and deforestation—including the clearing of forests for coffee farms—alter worldwide temperatures and weather patterns. Global warming and changes in precipitation will interfere with coffee plant growth, flowering, and fruiting, resulting in poor yields and lower-quality beans.[^31]

{% include embed/youtube.html vid="A33NTsWxc-o" caption="Climate Change and Coffee Products" aspect="1.55" %}

Researchers predict that climate change will drastically reduce coffee-suitable lands in the coming decades. One study projects that by 2050, the world’s most suitable areas for growing Arabica coffee could shrink by 54 to 60 percent.[^32] Another study estimates that Latin America could lose as much as 88 percent of its coffee-growing land by the same year.[^33]

{% include embed/image.html src="coffea-arabica-suitability-2050.PNG" caption="Change in climate-suitable lands by 2050 under intermediate emissions. Roman Grüter et al., [Expected global suitability of coffee, cashew and avocado due to climate change](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0261976), *PLOS ONE* 17, no. 1 (2022)." description="Change in climate-suitable lands by 2050 under intermediate emissions. Roman Grüter et al., [Expected global suitability of coffee, cashew and avocado due to climate change](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0261976), *PLOS ONE* 17, no. 1 (2022)." aspect="2" %}

Arabica is further threatened by another climate-related shift: more frequent and severe outbreaks of insect pests and plant diseases. The effects of climate change on insect pests are not uniform, but in general, rising temperatures are advantageous for insects.[^34] With global warming, these pests can proliferate at higher latitudes and elevations that were once too cold for survival.

{% include embed/image.html src="rising-temps-and-insect-pests.png" caption="Climate change generally benefits insects by promoting range expansion and boosting reproductive rates. Graphic by Nina Foster." aspect="1.78" %}

Such is the case for the coffee berry borer (*Hypothenemus hampei*), the world’s most notorious coffee insect pest.[^35] At less than two millimeters long, the female beetles bore into coffee fruits and feed on the developing seeds, creating galleries in which they can lay as many as 100 eggs. The larvae feast on the seed in which they hatch, further reducing its size and quality. The beetle has spread from West Africa to almost all coffee-producing regions, resulting in yearly losses that easily surpass 500 million dollars.[^36]

{% include embed/image-compare.html before="wc:Coffee_berry_borer2.jpg" after="wc:Amy_farms_typica_hybrid_coffee_beans.jpg" caption="Swipe across the images to see the impact of a coffee berry borer infestation." class="right" %}

Farmers typically treat these infestations by spraying chemical insecticides, releasing biological control agents, or removing and destroying infested coffee berries. However, the adoption and effectiveness of these practices vary based on cost, labor availability, and producer knowledge. With climate change, the problem will only get worse. The beetle is expected to plague previously unaffected regions, and its developmental time has been shown to decrease with warmer temperatures, meaning more insect generations and more damage.[^37]

{% include embed/image.html src="wc:Finca_La_Esperanza.jpg" caption="A coffee producer in Nicaragua inspects a coffee berry borer trap on his farm. Morgan Arnold via Wikimedia Commons." aspect="1.5" %}

Climate change could also intensify outbreaks of coffee leaf rust (*Hemileia vastatrix*). This fungal pathogen has caused extensive damage since it was first identified in the nineteenth century.[^38] The ailment blemishes coffee leaves with yellow and brown spots, coating their undersides with orange fungal spores. Infected trees lose their rusted leaves, produce lower yields, and usually die within a few years. In 2011, an epidemic that began in Central America damaged crops on roughly 70 percent of Latin American coffee farms, causing more than three billion dollars in damages by 2021. Now, higher temperatures and extreme weather events like flooding may create environments that are more conducive to the growth of the pathogen.[^39]

{% include embed/image-compare.html before="wc:Hemileia_vastatrix.jpg" after="wc:Coffea_arabica_Kawa_arabska_2021-0-09_01.jpg" caption="Swipe across the images to compare healthy coffee leaves with those infected by coffee leaf rust." class="right" %}

These challenges send ripples throughout the supply chain. In January 2025, coffee prices soared as a result of poor growing seasons due to drought, frost, and floods in Brazil and Vietnam.[^40] Low yields, coupled with rising demand, drove the retail price of ground coffee to an all-time high of seven dollars per pound, up from four dollars in January 2020. In theory, higher prices should yield higher profits for coffee growers—but it’s not that simple. The costs of labor, fertilizers, and other inputs are rising alongside coffee prices.[^41] Some coffee growers are concerned that coffee drinkers may limit their consumption in response to high prices, opting for cheaper sodas or energy drinks to satisfy their caffeine cravings.[^42]

{% include embed/youtube.html vid="4VePbuE9iIk" caption="Global Coffee Prices Rise as Drought Hits Brazil" aspect="1.55" %}

Climate change impacts both the coffee plant and the billions of people with a relationship to the crop, exacerbating the challenges that industry stakeholders already face. Extreme weather events, inflation, interest rates, unstable energy prices, and global conflicts drive market volatility.[^43] Some farmers toil under intense heat for eight to ten hours a day for very low wages.[^44] Smallholder farmers, who are responsible for at least 60 percent of the global coffee production, often have little negotiating power in coffee supply chains and are forced to get by on meager payments for their crops.[^45] In an ethnographic study of the Vietnamese coffee industry, Sarah G. Grant describes "a complicated web of risks and uncertainty" in which the decisions of state and global actors often fail to meet the needs of farmers.[^46]

{% include embed/image.html src="coffee-stakeholders.png" caption="Some of the stakeholders in the coffee industry. Graphic by Nina Foster." aspect="1.19" %}

Climate change will make coffee prices more unpredictable, labor conditions more hazardous under extreme heat, and economic losses more devastating. "For us, producing coffee is our life," said Honduran producer Moises Herrera in an interview with journalist Peter S. Goodman. "A lot of producers are starting to lose hope."[^47]

{% include embed/image.html src="wc:Coffee_farmer_-_triangulo_del_café.jpg" caption="A farmer in Colombia harvests ripe coffee berries. Maria del Pilar Ruiz via Wikimedia Commons." aspect="1.5" %}

# Climate-proofing Coffee 

In an ideal world, we would address the root cause of climate change by minimizing greenhouse gas emissions and protecting carbon sinks, such as oceans and forests. Unfortunately, our current climate mitigation policies are proving insufficient.[^48] The coffee industry must adapt accordingly. 

{% include embed/youtube.html vid="fmBDZKOdbkY" caption="Climate Adaptation and Mitigation" aspect="1.55" %}

Researchers have identified three main pathways to climate resilience in coffee production.[^49] The first involves relocating coffee farming to areas with suitable climates, including higher elevations. Although relocation would alleviate thermal stresses on coffee plants, the transition could result in the loss of livelihoods for farming communities at lower elevations as well as deforestation in favor of agricultural expansion.[^50]

{% include embed/image.html src="wc:Coffee_tree_atop_the_Maricao_mountains_in_Puerto_Rico_(5661610485).jpg" caption="A coffee tree in bloom at high elevation in Puerto Rico. US Fish and Wildlife Service via Wikimedia Commons." aspect="1.5" %}

The second pathway is to increase the adoption of sustainable farming practices like agroforestry, which integrates coffee plants with shade trees. In Central and South America, coffee was predominantly grown in agroforestry systems until the advent of the Green Revolution in the mid-twentieth century, which transformed agricultural operations in favor of higher yields and disease resistance.[^51] Many coffee farmers, most notably in Costa Rica and Colombia, shifted to unshaded, intensive farms with dwarf coffee varieties that required substantial fertilizer and pesticide applications.[^52] Today, those growing Arabica in full sun recognize that agroforestry would boost their plantation’s climate resilience, provide habitat for migratory birds and other wildlife, and reduce soil erosion. But the transition could also mean a drop in productivity and an increased risk of coffee leaf rust.[^53]

{% include embed/image.html src="wc:Café_bajo_sombra_-_49465736457.jpg" caption="Coffee growing in an agroforestry system in Puebla, Mexico. Feria  de Productores via Wikimedia Commons." aspect="1.5" %}

The third pathway—which is considered "the least disruptive, the most cost-effective, and probably the most successful"—is using the principles of genetics to develop climate-resilient coffee cultivars.[^54] Breeders played a key role in the Green Revolution by creating the dwarf Arabica plants that could grow more densely in monoculture than traditional varieties. Toward the end of the twentieth century, however, coffee breeding pivoted from an emphasis on productivity to address the growing concerns of climate change, pests and diseases, and cup quality.[^55]

{% include embed/image.html src="wc:DNA_Extraction_of_Bacteria.jpg" caption="Researchers extracting bacterial DNA. Iris Marie Kelly via Wikimedia Commons." aspect="1.33" %}

Using traditional plant breeding methods, scientists can develop hybrid coffee plants with desirable traits like disease resistance and drought tolerance. Current breeding efforts focus primarily on first-generation (F1) hybrid varieties, which are created by transferring pollen from the flower of one genetically distinct parent to another using a paintbrush, then planting the resulting seeds. Breeders typically cross wild Arabica varieties from Sudan or Ethiopia with common American cultivars. According to World Coffee Research, "One of the key distinguishing features of F1 hybrids is their 'hybrid vigor,' which can translate into everything from higher yields, to wider climate adaptability, to resilience in the face of stresses like disease (e.g., coffee rust), frost, or drought."[^56]

{% include embed/youtube.html vid="xahFgSSLonQ" caption="Coffee Breeding" aspect="1.55" %}

Early breeding efforts have prioritized Arabica and robusta, the species and flavor profiles that consumers know and love. But researchers are turning to other coffee species in search of climate-resilient traits. *Coffea stenophylla*, for instance, is a narrow-leaved species once farmed in Sierra Leone with a much higher temperature tolerance than Arabica.[^57] The plant’s beans have been described as "superior to those of all other species."[^58] Their flavor resembles a premium Arabica, with undertones of peach, jasmine, chocolate, and elderflower syrup. *Coffea stenophylla* produces comparatively low yields, but the plant’s heat tolerance, coupled with the impeccable cup quality, makes it a promising contender for coffee breeding. 

{% include embed/image.html src="wc:Coffea_stenophylla-Jardin_botanique_de_Berlin_(1).jpg" caption="*Coffea stenophylla* in the Berlin Botanic Garden. Ji-elle via Wikimedia Commons." aspect="1.67" %}

An additional benefit of F1 hybrids is their capacity to complement sustainable farming practices. A 2011 analysis of F1 hybrids in Central America found that the plants not only produced earlier and higher yields than traditional American cultivars; they also performed better in agroforestry systems than in full sun.[^59]

{% include embed/image.html src="full-sun-v-agroforestry.png" caption="Comparison of the mean yield of traditional American coffee cultivars versus hybrids according to the cropping system. From B. Bertrand et al., [Performance of Coffea arabica F1 hybrids in agroforestry and full-sun cropping systems in comparison with American pure line cultivars](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10681-011-0372-7), *Euphytica* 181 (2011)." aspect="1.45" %}

F1 hybrids are a promising climate solution, and a handful of cultivars are now commercially available to farmers. However, costs and logistical challenges pose a barrier to widespread implementation. "It is neither simple nor cheap to introduce a new cultivar, which takes at least 12 to 16 years from generation to approval for commercial use," explain researchers in Brazil.[^60] The price of a hybrid coffee seedling is 40 to 160 percent higher than a seedling of a traditional variety, and caring for F1 hybrids requires additional labor, fertilizer applications, and management know-how.[^61] Still, the benefits of higher outputs and fewer losses may outweigh the extra costs, especially for large-scale farms. 

{% include embed/image.html src="wc:Coffee_seedlings_produced_by_Asencio_Sánchez_(5662148216).jpg" caption="Coffee seedlings in Puerto Rico. US Fish and Wildlife Service via Wikimedia Commons." aspect="1.5" %}

Coffee breeding will rely on an abundance of genetic resources from which to select useful traits. Wild coffee species are an invaluable tool, offering the genetic variability that Arabica cultivars in the Americas lack. But many of these wild plants, like cultivated Arabica, are losing suitable habitat to climate change and human activity. At least 60 percent of the world’s wild coffee species are threatened with extinction.[^62]

{% include embed/image.html src="wc:Ethiopia's_Bale_Mountains_(MODIS_2021-01-19).jpg" caption="Aerial photo of Ethiopia’s Bale Mountains National Park, home to one of the largest natural stands of wild coffee genetic stock. NASA GSFC via Wikimedia Commons." aspect="1.3" %}

Preserving the genetic diversity of wild coffee species will require a combination of *in situ* conservation, which protects existing plants in their natural habitats, and *ex situ* conservation, which relocates plants to controlled environments.[^63] At present, *ex situ* collections are the primary method of conserving coffee genetic resources. Coffee is not a suitable candidate for long-term seed banking, because its seeds are sensitive to drying and freezing and cannot survive storage beyond two or three years.[^64] Instead, collections must care for live coffee plants.

{% include embed/image.html src="countries-with-ex-situ-field-collections.png" caption="Countries with *ex situ* field collections of coffee. Nina Foster, ArcGIS." aspect="1.38" %}

Just over half of all coffee species are preserved in germplasm collections. But researchers argue that the current system is "not sustainable, secure, cost effective, or rational."[^65] Most genetic resources are contained in nationally focused collections that are isolated from each other and from external users. Disagreements arise over ownership of genetic material. Furthermore, the collections often struggle with funding, outdated facilities, and staffing shortages. Many are located in ecological conditions that are ill-suited for plant performance or survival, leading to inappropriate cultivation methods and the loss of coffee trees.[^66] To more effectively conserve coffee genetic resources, stakeholders will have to expand protected areas and address the challenges that *ex situ* collections currently face. 

{% include embed/image.html src="wc:CIAT_genebank_(6918515038).jpg" caption="A researcher at the International Center for Tropical Agriculture genebank. Luigi Guarino via Wikimedia Commons." aspect="1.33" %}

# Brewing Partnerships 

A central theme emerges in publications on coffee, climate change, and the preservation of genetic resources. Several authors emphasize the need for improved collaboration and communication among industry stakeholders. For example, the Innovea Global Arabica Breeding Network—a global breeding effort led by World Coffee Research—argues that "individual national research programs face significant limitations working alone."[^67] Similarly, the authors of the 2017 *Global Conservation Strategy for Coffee Genetic Resources* write, "The global community will need to operate together as a platform for collaboration on conservation, breeding, research, and enhanced use."[^68]

{% include embed/image.html src="wc:Coffee_and_Friends_(Unsplash).jpg" caption="Coffee is an agent of connection. Nathan Dumlao via Wikimedia Commons." aspect="1.5" %}

Failing to adapt coffee to climate change would be catastrophic for the millions who depend on the crop for their livelihoods, especially the farmers who are already struggling to make ends meet. It won’t be easy, but for these climate solutions to be sustainable, researchers and policymakers must embrace cross-cultural dialogue and decide on a path forward that all stakeholders can agree to.  

{% include embed/image.html src="wc:Harvesting_coffee,_Sao_Paulo,_Brazil,_photo_from_The_Encyclopedia_of_Food_by_Artemas_Ward.jpg" caption="Coffee farmers in Sao Paulo, Brazil, 1923. Artemas Ward via Wikimedia Commons." aspect="1.41" %}

We cannot abandon the plant that has shaped societies in its travels from the forests of Ethiopia to the rest of the world. Safeguarding the future of this crop necessitates the very thing that coffee does best: cultivating connections, not just among consumers, but among everyone with ties to the production and deep-rooted history of this beloved seed.

{% include embed/image.html src="wc:Coffee_beans_in_a_farmer's_hands.jpg" caption="A handful of coffee’s cherished fruit. Wikimedia Commons." aspect="1.5" %}

[^1]: National Coffee Association, "Sustainability," About Coffee, accessed May 19, 2025, https://www.aboutcoffee.org/sustainability/.
[^2]: The ratio of Arabica to robusta for 2025/2026 production is almost one-to-one (97,022 bags for Arabica and 81,658 for robusta). United States Department of Agriculture Foreign Agricultural Service, *Coffee: World Markets and Trade* (USDA, 2024), 6, https://apps.fas.usda.gov/psdonline/circulars/coffee.pdf; Amelia Shister Graytock, *Is Robusta on the Rise? Trends in Coffee Species Trade* (U.S. International Trade Commission, 2024), https://www.usitc.gov/publications/332/executive_briefings/ebot_robusta_on_the_rise.pdf.
[^3]: Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, "Arabica Coffee," accessed Mary 19, 2025, https://www.kew.org/plants/arabica-coffee. 
[^4]: USDA, *Coffee*, 6.
[^5]: A Public Affair, "How Many Hands Touch Your Coffee Before You Drink It?" WORT Community Radio, Madison, WI: WORT-FM 89.9, June 3, 2024, https://www.wortfm.org/how-many-hands-touch-your-coffee-before-you-drink-it/. 
[^6]: National Coffee Association, "History of Coffee," About Coffee, accessed May 19, 2025, https://www.aboutcoffee.org/origins/history-of-coffee/. 
[^7]: This paper refers to the English translation of the treatise, which was originally published in Latin: Faustus Naironus Banesius, *A Discourse on Coffee: Its Description and Vertues* (London: George James, 1710), https://archive.org/details/bim_eighteenth-century_a-discourse-on-coffee-i_naironus-antonius-faust_1710/mode/1up. 
[^8]: Frederick L. Wellman, *Coffee: Botany, Cultivation, and Utilization* (London: Leonard Hill Books, 1910), 8. 
[^9]: Banesius, 4–5. 
[^10]: Banesius, 5. 
[^11]: Fernando E. Vega, "The Rise of Coffee," *American Scientist*, March 2008, 138. 
[^12]: Nancy Um, *The Merchant Houses of Mocha: Trade and Architecture in an Indian Ocean Port* (University of Washington Press, 2011), 36–47. 
[^13]: James Douglas, *Arbor Yemensis Fructum Cofè Ferens: Or, A Description and History of the Coffee Tree* (London: Thomas Woodward, 1727), 18, https://doi.org/10.5962/bhl.title.155053. 
[^14]: Vega, "The Rise of Coffee," 140.
[^15]: Richard B. Sheridan, "The Plantation Revolution and the Industrial Revolution, 1625-1775," *Caribbean Studies* 9, no. 3 (1969): 20, https://www.jstor.org/stable/25612146.
[^16]: James Douglas, *A Supplement to the Description of the Coffee-tree* (London: Thomas Woodward, 1727), 14, https://archive.org/details/supplementtodesc1727doug/mode/2up. 
[^17]: Douglas, 14. 
[^18]: Douglas, 18. 
[^19]: Douglas, 32. 
[^20]: Jürgen Habermas, *The Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere*, trans. Thomas Burger (Cambridge: The MIT Press, 1991), 57. 
[^21]: Brian Cowan, "The Rise of the Coffeehouse Reconsidered," *The Historical Journal* 47, no. 1 (2004): 21, http://www.jstor.org/stable/4091544.
[^22]: Brian Cowan, *The Social Life of Coffee: The Emergence of the British Coffeehouse* (Yale University Press, 2005), 2, http://www.jstor.org/stable/j.ctt1npc0p.
[^23]: Steve Pincus, "'Coffee Politicians Does Create': Coffeehouses and Restoration Political Culture," *The Journal of Modern History* 67, no. 4 (1995): 809, http://www.jstor.org/stable/2124756.
[^24]: Wolfgang Schivelbusch, *Tastes of Paradise: A Social History of Spices, Stimulants, and Intoxicants* (Pantheon Books, 1992), 69.
[^25]: Schivelbusch, 39. 
[^26]: John Frederick Frank, "Coffee Hour," *Poetry* 71, no. 3 (1947): 133, http://www.jstor.org/stable/20590301.
[^27]: Research and Markets, *Coffee Market Size and Share Analysis – Growth Trends and Forecast Report 2025-2033* (Research and Markets, 2025); USDA, *Coffee: World Markets and Trade*, 2.  
[^28]: Kishan Birader, "Genetic Diversity and the Adaptation of Species to Changing Environments," *Journal of Biodiversity & Endangered Species* 11, no. 3 (2023): 474.
[^29]: François Anthony et al., "The Origin of Cultivated *Coffea arabica* L. Varieties Revealed by AFLP and SSR Markers," *Theoretical and Applied Genetics* 104 (2002): 899, https://doi.org/10.1007/s00122-001-0798-8.
[^30]: Selena Ahmed et al., "Climate Change and Coffee Quality: Systematic Review on the Effects of Environmental and Management Variation on Secondary Metabolites and Sensory Attributes of *Coffea arabica and Coffea canephora,*" *Frontiers in Plant Science* 12 (2021): 3, https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2021.708013. 
[^31]: Goytom Abraha Kahsay et al., "New Coffee Varieties as a Climate Adaptation Strategy: Empirical Evidence from Costa Rica," *World Development Sustainability* 2 (2023): 1, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wds.2023.100046.
[^32]: Roman Grüter et al., "Expected Global Suitability of Coffee, Cashew and Avocado Due to Climate Change," *PLOS One* 17, no. 1 (2022): 8, https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0261976. 
[^33]: Pablo Imbach et al., "Coupling of Pollination Services and Coffee Suitability under Climate Change," *Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America* 114, no. 39 (2017): 10438, https://www.jstor.org/stable/26488042. 
[^34]: Jeffrey S. Bale et al., "Herbivory in Global Climate Change Research: Direct Effects of Rising Temperature on Insect Herbivores," *Global Change Biology* 8, no. 1 (2002): 7, https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1365-2486.2002.00451.x. 
[^35]: Natalia Moreno-Ramirez et al., "Ecology and Management of the Coffee Berry Borer (*Hypothenemus hampei*): The Potential of Biological Control," *BioControl* 69 (2024): 199, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10526-024-10253-6. 
[^36]: Sarada Krishnan et al., "Vulnerability of Coffee (*Coffea* spp.) Genetic Resources in the United States" *Genetic Resources and Crop Evolution* 68 (2021): 2699, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10722-021-01217-1. 
[^37]: Lewis H. Ziska et al., "Climate Change, Carbon Dioxide, and Pest Biology, Managing the Future: Coffee as a Case Study" *Agronomy* 8, no. 152 (2018): 6, https://doi.org/10.3390/agronomy8080152.
[^38]: Encyclopedia Britannica, "Coffee Rust," Britannica, accessed May 19, 2025, https://www.britannica.com/science/coffee-rust.
[^39]: Ziska et al., 3. 
[^40]: Ben Brasch, "Why Your Coffee Fix Has Gotten So Pricey—And It Will Only Get Worse," *The Washington Post*, February 26, 2025, https://www.washingtonpost.com/business/2025/02/26/coffee-price-inflation-tariffs/. 
[^41]: Sarah Charles, "How Roasters and Producers are Adapting to Changing Coffee Prices," *Coffee Intelligence*, March 11, 2025, https://intelligence.coffee/2025/03/adapting-to-changing-coffee-prices/. 
[^42]: Peter S. Goodman, "Coffee Prices Are at a 50-Year High. Producers Aren’t Celebrating," *The New York Times*, February 22, 2025, https://www.nytimes.com/2025/02/22/business/coffee-prices-climate-change.html?smid=url-share.
[^43]: Kathryn Lewis, "What’s Causing Coffee Market Volatility?" Global Coffee Report, November 21, 2024, https://www.gcrmag.com/whats-causing-coffee-market-volatility/.
[^44]: Alice Nguyen, "Bitter Origins: Labor Exploitation in Coffee Production," The Borden Project, accessed July 31, 2025, https://borgenproject.org/labor-exploitation-in-coffee-production/. 
[^45]: Pablo Siles, Carlos R. Cerdán, and Charles Staver, "Smallholder Coffee in the Global Economy—a Framework to Explore Transformation Alternatives of Traditional Agroforestry for Greater Economic, Ecological, and Livelihood Viability," *Frontiers in Sustainable Food Systems* 6 (2022): 2; Fairtrade Foundation, "Four Threats to Your Morning Coffee," September 6, 2023, https://www.fairtrade.org.uk/media-centre/blog/four-threats-to-coffee/. 
[^46]: Sarah G. Grant, "Complicated Webs: Experiential Risk in the Vietnamese Coffee Industry," *Political and Legal Anthropology Review* 44, no. 1 (2021): 76.
[^47]: Goodman. 
[^48]: United Nations Environment Programme, *Emissions Gap Report 2024: No more hot air … please!* (United Nations, 2024), XIII, https://www.unep.org/resources/emissions-gap-report-2024. 
[^49]: Aaron P. Davis et al., "Arabica-Like Flavour in a Heat-Tolerant Wild Coffee Species," *Nature Plants* 7 (2021): 413, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41477-021-00891-4. 
[^50]: Ainhoa Magrach and Jaboury Ghazoul, "Climate and Pest-Driven Geographic Shifts in Global Coffee Production: Implications for Forest Cover, Biodiversity and Carbon Storage," *PLOS One* 10, no. 7 (2015): 1, https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0133071. 
[^51]: B. Bertrand et al., "Performance of *Coffea arabica* F1 Hybrids in Agroforestry and Full-Sun Cropping Systems in Comparison with American Pure Line Cultivars," *Euphytica* 181 (2011): 148, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10681-011-0372-7. 
[^52]: Bertrand et al., 148; Stuart McCook and Andrea Montero-Mora, "Coffee Breeding in a Time of Crisis: F1 Hybrids in Central America Since 1990," *Plants People Planet* 6 (2024): 1071, https://doi.org/10.1002/ppp3.10480.
[^53]: Philippe Vaast, "Fruit thinning and shade improve bean characteristics and beverage quality of coffee (*Coffea arabica* L.) under optimal conditions," *Journal of the Science of Food and Agriculture* 86, no. 2 (2005): 197, https://doi.org/10.1002/jsfa.2338; D.F. López-Bravo et al., "Shade is conducive to coffee rust as compared to full sun exposure under standardized fruit load conditions," *Crop Protection* 38 (2012): 21, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cropro.2012.03.011.
[^54]: Aaron P. Davis et al., "The Re-Emergence of Liberica Coffee as a Major Crop Plant" *Nature Plants* 8 (2022): 1322, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41477-022-01309-5. 
[^55]: McCook and Montero-Mora, 1070. 
[^56]: World Coffee Research, "F1 Hybrid Trials," accessed May 20, 2025, https://worldcoffeeresearch.org/programs/next-generation-f1-hybrid-varieties.
[^57]: Aaron P. Davis et al., 415. 
[^58]: Marta Zaraska, "How a Forgotten Bean Could Save Coffee From Extinction," *Smithsonian Magazine*, April 2025, 8, https://www.smithsonianmag.com/science-nature/how-forgotten-bean-could-save-coffee-from-extinction-180986230/. 
[^59]: Bertrand et al., 147.
[^60]: Gabriele Dias Cássia et al., "Climate Risks and Vulnerabilities of the Arabica Coffee in Brazil Under Current and Future Climates Considering New CMIP6 Models," *Science of the Total Environment* 907 (2024): 10, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2023.167753. 
[^61]: Kahsay et al., 7. 
[^62]: Aaron P. Davis et al., "High Extinction Risk for Wild Coffee Species and Implications for Coffee Sector Sustainability," *Science Advances* 5 (2019): 1, https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.aav3473. 
[^63]: Paula Bramel et al., *Global Conservation Strategy for Coffee Genetic Resources* (Crop Trust and World Coffee Research, 2017), https://worldcoffeeresearch.org/resources/global-coffee-conservation-strategy. 
[^64]: Bramel et al., 10. 
[^65]: Bramel et al., 6. 
[^66]: Bramel et al., 12.
[^67]: World Coffee Research, "Innovea Global Arabica Breeding Network," accessed May 21, 2025, https://worldcoffeeresearch.org/programs/global-breeding-network. 
[^68]: Bramel et al., 6.
