---
title: 'The Gulmohar: Becoming Native'
description: This article explores the history and cultural significance of the Gulmohar
  tree (Delonix regia), tracing its journey from Madagascar to India through colonial
  botanical networks in the nineteenth century.
author: Nidhish Birhade
date: 2025-08-05
permalink: /gulmohar
tags: flower ornamental subtropical tree tropical
published: true
featured: true
media_subpath: /assets/posts/gulmohar
image:
  path: CurtisGulmohar.jpg
juncture: true
---

The *[Delonix regia](Q238486)*—or the Gulmohar, as it is called in India—is a flowering tree native to Madagascar.[^1] It blossoms every summer across villages and cities in India, and its vivid red flowers are associated strongly with the ideas of home, nostalgia, and summertime. A popular name for housing societies, residential areas, parks, restaurants, resorts, boutiques, companies, songs, a literary magazine, and an award-winning Disney+ Hotstar movie, the Gulmohar takes on many faces in India, each serving as a testament to its cultural significance. 

{% include embed/image.html src="wc:Delonix_regia_(Hook.)_Raf._(486405819).jpg" caption="The red flowers of the Gulmohar. Image credit: Wikimedia Commons." aspect="1.33" %}

This sense that the Gulmohar tree is entrenched in Indian culture, however, belies the fact that the plant only appeared in the subcontinent in the nineteenth century. First ‘discovered’ in 1828 in Madagascar, within a few decades, the tree made its way across the [tropics](Q42530) through the botanical networks of the [British Empire](Q8680), blossoming in India and reaching as far as Jamaica and Singapore.[^2] The Gulmohar’s journey, from its introduction to India by the [East India Company](Q83164) to its eventual cultural integration, tells a fascinating story of how botany, colonization, revolution, art, and memory aligned to root a plant in the [Indian subcontinent](Q60140).

{% include embed/image.html src="wc:Marianne_North_(1830-1890)_-_Foliage_and_Flowers_of_a_Madagascar_Tree_at_Singapore_-_MN343_-_Marianne_North_Gallery.jpg" caption="*Foliage and Flowers of a Madagascar Tree at Singapore*, by Marianne North, illustrated in 1876. By 1866, the Gulmohar was noted as an exotic plant that “grows well” on the island of Singapore. Image credit: Wikimedia Commons." aspect="1.38" %}

# Colonial Discover

The discovery of the Gulmohar in Madagascar reveals the intimate, transnational network of botanists who operated out of the colonies, partaking in the trade of botanical material and knowledge with their contemporaries in Europe. The tree was discovered by [Wenceslas Bojer](Q637799) (1795–1856), a French-speaking botanist from Prague. [Francis I](Q130834), the Emperor of Austria, sponsored Bojer’s education and marked him “destined at a future period for missions of scientific discovery."[^3] In 1820, Bojer traveled to Mauritius, a British colony, where he lived for the rest of his life and from there undertook [botanical expeditions](Q16999243) spanning the east coast of Africa and the islands of the Indian Ocean, with a focus on Madagascar. 

{% include embed/image.html src="wc:Carte_des_îles_de_Madagascar,_de_Bonaparte_et_de_France_(33743100703).jpg" caption="A French map of Madagascar, dated to 1810. Because of its geological isolation for over 88 million years, Madagascar is a biodiversity hotspot that is home to nearly 11,000 endemic plant species. Image credit: Wikimedia Commons." aspect="1.49" %}

Mauritius was a budding center of imperial botanical learning. Its past as a French colony—from 1715 until it was seized by the British in 1810—resulted in it being a site of collaboration between English and French speakers. In addition to Bojer was part of a group of botanists that included Irish botanist [Charles Telfair](Q1066232) and his wife, Anna; Mauritian botanist [Louis Bouton](Q2114760); and [Julien Desjardins](Q1712234), all of whom were in close contact with [Sir William Jackson Hooker](Q472639), the first director of the [Royal Botanic Gardens at Kew](Q188617). Centers of knowledge in the [metropole](Q21855250) acted as authorities that legitimized the findings of overseas botanists, while depending on them to discover rare plant species that would expand the Empire’s knowledge, resources, and trade.[^4] The botanists at Mauritius thus sent Hooker regular reports of their discoveries along with seeds and specimens. In exchange, they relied on Hooker to send news of scientific and botanical progress in Europe, as they felt they were “exiled from the world of knowledge.”[^5]

{% include embed/image.html src="wc:Isle_of_France,_2_December_1810.jpg" caption="*The taking of the Isle of France*. Mauritius was captured by the British in 1810. Prior to the invasion, it was called Isle de France, and French remains a de facto language in the country today. Image credit: Wikimedia Commons." aspect="1.37" %}

In 1828, Charles Telfair wrote to Hooker about a plant specimen discovered by Bojer that was “worthy of a place” in his works: the _Poinciana regia_ (it would later be renamed _Delonix regia_).[^6] Bojer likely discovered the plant during his second expedition to Madagascar. Following his initial letter, Telfair sent Hooker seeds of the plant and a drawing by Bojer, hoping to get it published in _Curtis’s Botanical Magazine_, for which Hooker was its main editor.[^7] At the time, the magazine was the largest and most renowned serial publication of its kind. 

{% include embed/image.html src="wc:Hanging_pods_of_Gulmohar.jpg" caption="The pods of the Gulmohar are green when young, but turn brown and woody when mature. Image credit: Wikimedia Commons." aspect="1.33" %}
{% include embed/image.html src="wc:Starr_020630-0014_Delonix_regia.jpg" caption="Each pod contains 20-45 seeds, each about 2cm in length. Image credit: Wikimedia Commons." aspect="1.33" %}

# European Fascination

In 1829, Hooker included an entry on the *Poinciana regia* in the magazine. The entry was accompanied by Joseph Swan’s stunning engraving of _Poinciana regia_ flowers based on a “magnificent drawing” by Bojer.[^8] In his descriptions, Hooker mentioned that they sometimes published entries on beautiful and rare plants that the English had no hope of cultivating successfully in the country; but this, he claimed, was not the case with the *Poinciana regia*. He would have waited for the plant to blossom before publishing an entry on it, if it “were not the subject of such great interest.”[^9] He expressed hope “of its blossoming in this country” very soon, thanks to the attempt of [Robert Barclay](Q58481113) (a wealthy businessman and amateur botanist) to raise saplings of the seeds sent by Telfair. Barclay’s vast garden [Bury Hill](Q17547713) had been the site of many exotic plants taking root in Britain.[^10]  

{% include embed/iframe.html src="https://archive.org/embed/mobot31753002721295/page/2884" caption="The" aspect=".7" %}

The hope for the tree’s [naturalization](Q2878495) on British shores, however, did not bear fruit, as Barclay passed away in 1831, and with his death the monetary support for the tree’s growth in the British Isles ended.[^11] In 1833, Telfair and his wife Anna died in Madagascar, both by sudden and strange illness.[^12] 

{% include embed/iframe.html src="https://archive.org/embed/mobot31753002221502/page/122" caption="A" aspect=".7" %}

European fascination with the plant continued to grow. In the French herbal _Histoire naturelle des végétaux_ (1834), French botanist Édouard Spach wrote of the “magnifique” _Poinciana regia_ and noted that English horticultural establishments possessed its saplings.[^13] In 1837, the tree was included in *[Paxton’s Magazine of Botany](Q13548591)*’s register of flowering plants, which praised it as a splendid plant that “ought to be in every collection.”[^14] Bojer’s French manuscript about the flora of Mauritius and the surrounding islands, *[Hortus Mauritianus](Q20897639)*, was published in 1837, with an entry on the *Poinciana regia*, fittingly called the Flamboyant in French.[^15] By then, however, the tree was already well known across Europe.

{% include embed/image.html src="specimenimage.jpg" caption="*Delonix regia*: Herbarium Specimen. COI University of Coimbra, John Gossweiler 11368." aspect=".65" %}

# An Imperial Experiment in Botany 

Towards the end of the decade, in 1838, the [Agricultural and Horticultural Society of India](Q115317665) decided to take on an imperial “experiment” to be conducted “on a magnificent scale”: the gradual introduction and eventual “naturalising” of the world’s “indigenous” plants within India.[^16] As the Society’s leading members wrote in their correspondence, the successful introduction of valuable plants into the “countries they rule… can scarcely be questioned, particularly in the Indian case due to the vegetarian diet of the population, and the fact that more plant species would act as safeguards during “severe visitations of Providence,” like drought and famine. They claimed that due to the “productive power” of the soil, and the vast varieties of landscape, plants “of every climate, except the Arctic, may be so completely naturalised” in the country. This plan would also involve the “interchange of plants between Bombay and Calcutta,” two centers of British power. The [Calcutta Botanic Garden](Q3346386), established in 1787, was a major site of plant exchange, “a center of experimentation with living plants from all over the subcontinent and the world”,[^17] and Bombay was home to gardens scattered across the localities of Parel, Mazgaon, and Colaba, in addition to a botanical garden at the nearby Dapuri, which lay within the [Bombay Presidency](Q891827).[^18]

{% include embed/image.html src="https://collectionapi.metmuseum.org/api/collection/v1/iiif/287858/608144/main-image" caption="The Calcutta Botanic Garden. Viscount Valentia, the Earl of Mountnorris in Northern Ireland, visited the garden in 1808. Image credit: Gilman Collection, The Metropolitan Museum of Art." aspect="1.24" %}

The Gulmohar snuck into the list of ornamental plants to be introduced to Bombay, during the first wave of the Society’s botanical experiment in 1838.[^19] Within three years, [William Griffith](Q11705310), an East India Company botanist, was growing the tree in the Calcutta Botanic Garden.[^20] Just two years later, Griffith sent a letter to his peer [Robert Wight](Q1375864), the secretary of the botanical gardens in Madras, sharing “plenty of seed” of the “beautiful tree” that was _Poinciana regia_.[^21] In the late 1840s, Scottish surgeon [Alexander Gibson](Q2833120), superintendent of the botanic garden at Dapuri, commissioned an Indo-Portuguese artist to document the Gulmohar, among other plants, in a distinct example of a [company painting](Q861297), with close-up views that evince an intimate engagement with the plant.[^22] Like their counterparts in Mauritius, the work of the botanists in India was driven by colonial policy and their personal desire to study the “treasure” of India’s flora; they often researched local plant species that were not of much interest to the colonial powers for transplantation or trade.[^23] At the same time, their individual botanical ambitions and ideologies often clashed with those of other botanists practicing in India, producing a rich tapestry of personal motivations in the exchange of botanical material.[^24] Botanical passion and colonial directives thus coincided to see the Gulmohar blossom across gardens in the subcontinent.

{% include embed/image.html src="MapScreenshot.png" caption="Bombay, Calcutta, and Madras (renamed Mumbai, Kolkata, and Chennai respectively, as non-anglicized names in Independent India), the centers of British power. The Gulmohar first arrived in Bombay and then made its way to the coastal edges of the subcontinent through colonial botanists." aspect="" %}

# Becoming “Gulmohar”: A Tale of Two Flowers

After its introduction to India, the Gulmohar spread rapidly. What is more surprising than its swift geographical spread, however, is the ease with which it integrated into the subcontinent’s cultures. In [Malayalam](Q36236), the language of present-day Kerala along the [Malabar coast](Q1534252), it adopts a fascinating vernacular name, Kaalvarippoo. This translates to “Flowers of Calvary” and refers to the belief among [Saint Thomas Christians](Q648601) that the flower gained its blood-red color from growing near the cross at [Calvary hill](Q170516) where Jesus was crucified.[^25] Different languages and cultures adapted the tree to their beliefs, translating it into the language of pre-existing flora or into the regional significance of the flower’s striking color. 

{% include embed/image.html src="wc:Codice_Casanatense_Saint_Thomas_Christians.jpg" caption="A Portuguese illustration from the *Codice Casantense*, depicting the Saint Thomas Christians of the Malabar Coast. The inscription reads: Malabarese, made Christians by the well-ventured Saint Thomas. Circa 1540. Image credit: Wikimedia Commons." aspect="1.38" %}

One possible reason for the ease with which the Gulmohar fit into the Indian context is its visual and aesthetic similarity to existing flora. Its vibrant red color matches several flowers, including the Peacock Flower (*[Caesalpinia pulcherrima](Q1428973)*, known as the _Poinciana pulcherrima_ in the nineteenth century) and the Flame of the Forest (*[Butea monosperma](Q942203)*). Native to South America, the Peacock Flower had been [transplanted](Q11000978) to India by the seventeenth century.[^26] In 1839, just as the _Poinciana regia_ was being introduced to the subcontinent, Bombay Government Press published a catalogue of the plants growing in Bombay and its vicinity. It is here that the Peacock Flower, the _Poinciana pulcherrima_, was listed as “Gool Mohur,” and the catalog noted that the plant was “common in every garden.”[^27]  By the time the Gulmohar came to India, then, there was already a plant referred to as Gulmohar.

{% include embed/image.html src="wc:Caesalpinia_pulcherrima_-_Peacock_Flower_at_Kunnathurpadi_(1).jpg" caption="The Peacock Flower was called the Gulmohar prior to the Delonix regia’s arrival in the subcontinent. Image credit: Wikimedia Commons." aspect="1.5" %}
{% include embed/image.html src="wc:Caesalpinia_pulcherrima_-_Peacock_Flower_at_Kunnathurpadi_(4).jpg" caption="The Peacock flower. Image credit: Wikimedia Commons" aspect="1.5" %}
{% include embed/image.html src="wc:Poinciana-pulcherrima.png" caption="An illustration of the Peacock flower from *Familiar Indian Flowers* (1878) by Lena Lowis. Image credit: Wikimedia Commons." aspect="1.47" %}

The plants’ similarity lies in their flowers’ red color. The primary difference between them is morphological: the _Poinciana regia_ is a [deciduous](Q1131316) tree that grows to a height of ten meters, while the _Poinciana pulcherrima_ is a shrub that grows to about three meters.[^28] While they were placed in the same [genus](Q34740) when the *Poinciana regia* was discovered, by the latter half of the nineteenth century, _Poinciana pulcherrima_ had become _Caesalpinia pulcherrima_, and the _Poinciana regia_ had long been renamed _Delonix regia_. In the latter case, however, the old name stuck: the Gulmohar is still commonly called the *Poinciana* in Australia and the Western Hemisphere. 

{% include embed/image-compare.html before="wc:Starr-090623-1693-Delonix_regia-flowering_habit-Paani_Mai_Park_Hana-Maui_(24340315673).jpg" after="wc:Caesalpinia_pulcherrima_001.jpg" caption="_Poinciana regia_ and _Poinciana pulcherrima_ were once confused by name because of the similarity of the flowers' red color." class="right" %}

This confusion between the two flowers was common and was a defining feature in the history of their identification—or misidentification. In _A Dictionary of English Names of Plants_ (1884), William Miller listed two [binomial names](Q36642) for the Peacock flower: the _Poinciana pulcherrima_ for the common variety and the _Poinciana regia_ for the royal variety.[^29] The distinction of one being royal was repeated in the 1889 _Journal of the Bombay Natural History Society_, in which _Poinciana regia_ referred to the royal Gulmohar and the _Poinciana pulcherrima_ to the common one.[^30] Interestingly, when Gulmohar is anglicized, it is often misspelled as “gold mohur,” which was also the name for gold coins issued in British India, as well as during the former [Mughal](Q33296) and [Maratha empires](Q83618).[^31] The plant appears several times in George Orwell’s *[Burmese Days](Q1762079)* as the “Gold mohur” with “blood-red” flowers, framing the landscape of [British Burma](Q2376315).[^32]

{% include embed/image.html src="wc:India_1835_2_Mohurs.jpg" caption="The Gold mohur coin that was issued in British India, as well as during the Mughal and Maratha empires prior to colonization. Image credit: Wikimedia Commons." aspect="1.97" %}

The *Delonix regia* becomes the Gulmohar through a unique encounter with the Peacock flower, whereby it slowly adopts the latter’s name. By the middle of the nineteenth century, the Gulmohar was a common sight in India. The Agricultural and Horticultural Society of Western India sold its seeds, noting that it was “naturalised,”[^33] with its flowers blossoming across India from the [Lalbagh Botanical Garden](Q200711) of Bangalore to the banks of the [Ganges](Q5089) at Munger and Jamalpur.[^34] With their spread, the names of the two flowers became fixed: by the end of the century, Gulmohar was used only to refer to the *Delonix regia*, while Peacock Flower was called by alternative names like Guliturah in [Hindi](Q1568) and Shankasur in [Marathi](Q1571).[^35] 

{% include embed/image.html src="wc:Gulmohar_gate.jpg" caption="The Gulmohar Gate in the [Lalbagh](Q200711) Botanical Garden, Bangalore. Image credit: Wikimedia Commons." aspect="1.33" %}

This dynamic plays out similarly in the [Bengali](Q9610) language: the Gulmohar takes on the name of the Peacock Flower. By the early nineteenth century, the Peacock Flower was called the Krishnachura in Bengali.[^36] Krishnachura is a compound of two words: [Krishna](Q42891) referring to the Hindu deity, who is often symbolized through peacock feathers, and chura possibly referring to bangles, particularly a bride’s wedding bangles. As the nineteenth century came to a close, however, Krishnachura became the Bengali name for the Gulmohar, and the Peacock Flower took on a different name: Radhachura.[^37] Interestingly, [Radha](Q113904) is the name of the divine consort of Krishna—the childhood lover whom he does not marry. The couple is commonly represented as the union of two souls that are one: they cannot be separated, just like the lack of possible differentiation between deer-musk and its perfume, and just as “the moon can never be shorn of its very own moonbeam.”[^38] The longing for the lover who is the self represents the dyad of these divine lovers, who are often referred to by the conjoined name Radhakrishna.[^39] In Bengali, the names of the Peacock Flower and the Gulmohar thus come to embody Radha and Krishna, representing a fascinating union of the divine lovers and the unique possibility of desire and identification between the two red flowers. 

{% include embed/image.html src="https://collectionapi.metmuseum.org/api/collection/v1/iiif/65594/1592348/main-image" caption="The divine lovers Radha and Krishna walk in a grove of red flowering trees surrounded by peacocks. Painting circa 1720. Image credit: Cynthia Hazen Polsky and Leon B. Polsky Fund, 2003, The Metropolitan Musuem of Art." aspect=".7" %}

# The Gulmohar as Political Symbol

Though the British left the subcontinent in 1947, they left behind countries drained of natural resources, shattered by colonization, and separated by religious borders. The massive transformations wrought by the colonizing powers—a radical change in traditional agriculture by the forceful adoption of commercial crops, the destruction of the traditional crafts and artisan class, the fracturing (and sometimes formation) of caste barriers, the creation of an educated class of English speakers through an overhaul of the education system, and the [partition](Q129053) of the subcontinent into two nations on religious lines—were accompanied by seemingly more subtle changes in culture and landscape. The sprawl of the Gulmohar across both urban sidewalks and rural farms was one of those changes. 

{% include embed/image.html src="wc:How_India_be_split_up_(1947).jpg" caption="An illustration in the *Daily Herald of London*, outlining the possible partition plan. It calls attention to Punjab and Bengal, the two regions that were split between the two nations due to an equal population of Hindus and Muslims. Image credit: Wikimedia Commons." aspect=".95" %}

Seemingly apolitical subjects sometimes become symbols for political transformation. After Independence, [East Pakistan](Q842931) (present-day Bangladesh) was grappling with its dual identities of religion and language. Pakistan had declared [Urdu](Q1617) and English to be its only official languages—Urdu was spoken widely in Pakistan, but not in East Pakistan, which was Bengali-speaking. Spurred to action, student protests broke out across [Dhaka](Q1354), the capital of East Pakistan, on February 21, 1952, with the police responding with violence. Mahbub ul Alam Chowdhury, one of the students at the protest, wrote the poem, “Kandte ashini – phanshir dabi niye eshechhi” (I have not come to weep, but to demand they be hanged), where the Gulmohar, called the Krishnachura in Bengali, takes on a deeply symbolic role: “I have not come, where they laid down their lives / Under the Krishnachura trees, / to shed tears. / I have not come, where endless patches of blood / Glow like so many fiery flowers, to weep.”[^40]

{% include embed/image.html src="wc:Rickshaw_in_Dhaka_1960s.jpg" caption="A Gulmohar in Dhaka in the 1960s. The tree is a common sight in Dhaka, where it is called Krishnachura in Bengali. Image credit: Wikimedia Commons." aspect="1" %}

Comparing the spilled blood of the martyrs to red flowers, instead of aestheticizing the brutal violence, feeds into the poem’s deferral of anger, which eventually reaches its fever pitch with the demand to hang the perpetrators. The poem was banned, and copies of it were seized by the newly created Pakistani government. There was an arrest warrant for Chowdhury, but he managed to escape. The poem gave birth to a new genre of poetry that spoke of the mother tongue and the rage of those denied their language: Ekushey literature.[^41] This sentiment would feed into the war that led to the liberation of Bangladesh as a separate nation in 1971. The International Mother Language Day was set up by UNESCO in 1982, commemorating the Bengali Language protests that began on February 21, 1952.[^42]

{% include embed/image.html src="wc:International_Mother_Language_Day_04.jpg" caption="A Gathering in Khulna, Bangladesh, celebrating the International Mother Language Day that commemorates the language martyrs of 1952. Image credit: Wikimedia Commons." aspect="1.65" %}

Across the border in India, the Gulmohar took on a fascinating role in the [caste](Q484416) politics of [West Bengal](Q1356). _The Story of the Arjun and the Krishnachura Tree_ (2014), by poet Mandakranta Sen, places two trees in opposition: the [Arjun tree](Q2719381) and the Krishnachura.[^43] The Arjun tree is “An Aryan male—a pillar of aristocracy” that all other trees bow down to. The term “[Aryan](Q179733)” has a complicated history in India, used by upper-caste communities to uphold racial purity and trace their origin to a common “Indo-European” homeland, and on the other hand employed by progressive anti-caste movements to relegate the upper castes to being ancient invaders of the subcontinent.[^44] Unlike the Arjun Tree, however, the Krishnachura is decidedly new to the land: its seed comes “from somewhere”—the poem does not bother to dwell on its origins—and eventually blossoms into a beautiful “[Santhal](Q1260346) girl,” from a tribal community that lies outside of the system of caste. The Arjun tree desires this tree that has “crimson in her hair,” but his desire is rooted in superiority and domination: “Only he could claim beauty so fair,” he thinks, being an Aryan male. The Krishnachura does not relent: “She wasn't drawn to the Aryan male / She was busy making the buds bloom.” The Arjun tree is forced only to gaze, shed his bark, and “accept he cannot win,” for the Krishnachura sheds blood —seemingly referring to menstruation, which cuts against caste-based ideas of purity where menstruation is seen as polluting.[^45]  What emerges is a tale of the introduced species, the Gulmohar, representing a space of beauty and subversion that exists outside of a culture rooted in caste domination.

{% include embed/image.html src="wc:Terminalia_arjuna_trunk_01_by_Line1.JPG" caption="The Arjun tree shares its name with Arjuna, a key character from the Vedic epic Mahabharata, in which five brothers fight a war of righteous succession against their cousins. Image credit: Wikimedia Commons." aspect=".75" %}
{% include embed/image.html src="wc:BhagavadGita-19th-century-Illustrated-Sanskrit-Chapter_1.20.21.jpg" caption="Arjuna is guided by Lord Krishna, his charioteer and brother-in-law, pictured alongside him above. Image credit: Wikimedia Commons." aspect="1.65" %}

# The Gulmohar and Longing 

Desire, temporality, memory, and longing come together in the symbolic power of the Gulmohar in modern India. Turning to film, music, and literature can give a clearer understanding of its influence and associations. “If your name were Gulmohar,” sings the [Bollywood](Q93196) hero of the 1978 movie _Devata_ as he presents his lover with a Gulmohar flower, “then making the spring laugh would be my task.”[^46] Throughout the song, the lovers frolic around the Gulmohar. The camera pans across the tree, taking wide shots of its blossoming canopy, cutting shots of the sighing lovers under its bouncing branches, and focusing on the falling flowers. By the 1970s, the Gulmohar was a common sight in India, and the song uses the tree not only as a lyrical symbol but as a physical, living character that is very much a part of the action and movement on screen. “When the spring comes next time, ask it one small thing,” sings the hero, “without my flower, how could its name be spring?” The heroine sings back with his own words, “If your name were Gulmohar, then making the spring laugh would be my task!”

{% include embed/iframe.html src="https://geo.dailymotion.com/player.html?video=x8mtotz;start=30" aspect="1.6" %}

In another movie from the 1970s, the devotional _Narad Leela_, the Gulmohar is evoked to represent the unrequited desire of an Apsara—a divine nymph of heaven—for the celibate [Narad](Q844066), the messenger of the Gods. They meet when Narad is deep in ascetic meditation. Indra, the King of Heaven, fearing that Narad is gaining too much divine power, instructs Kaamdev, the god of desire, to end Narad’s meditation. Kaamdev thus sends the Apsara to tempt Narad out of his asceticism. The plan of the gods, however, backfires: the [Apsara](Q148773) falls in love with Narad instead. “I came to color your body in my shade/ But mine paled; I have become your shade,” she sings in the song _Gulmohar Ke Lal Lal Phulwa Khil Gaye_, dancing around the meditating Narad.[^47] Though the visuals do not feature the Gulmohar, the tree is immediately conjured in the lyrics: “The red buds of the Gulmohar have blossomed, my love/ With red on its cheeks, the pink season has come/ Leaving me this gift, childhood has gone away.”  

{% include embed/youtube.html vid="YGZ9rz1MNbE" aspect="1.55" %}

Though the Gulmohar is linked with the beginning of desire and the end of childhood in _Narad Leela_, it is most often associated with nostalgia and childhood memories. In his 1965 poem _The Krishnachura Tree_, Syed Ali Hasan recalls the sensations of his childhood in a staccato of end-stopped lines, “Green night in the leaves of trees./ The blue of inexhaustible rest in rivers./ Many trees supported by shining vines.” The poem ends ponderously recalling the eponymous tree: “The history of my memory/ the krishnachura as seen/ by the eyes of youth.”[^48]  Notably, the Odia poet Pravasani Mahakud’s poem _Forget, forget_ begins with the Gulmohar tree: “Forget the sight of the first blossoming/ of the Gulmohar plant:/ may be some heart’s blood remains on it, may be/ some forehead’s pain and may be even some greenness/ of the whole body.”[^49] There is a magic, it seems, at first sight of the blossoming Gulmohar tree. The tree is always marred by the “heart’s blood” from the encounter in childhood. 

{% include embed/image.html src="wc:Delonix_regia_in_north_kerala.jpg" caption="The transience of the Gulmohar blooming brightly in the summer and then losing its color mirrors both the intensity and the ephemerality of youth. Image credit: Wikimedia Commons." aspect="1.5" %}

Longing is a recurring motif associated with the Gulmohar tree. The Disney+ Hostar movie *[Gulmohar](Q117019661)* revolves around themes of nostalgia, memory, and inheritance.[^50] The family reels from the loss of its patriarch, while his widow Kusum Batra tries to hold three generations together in their house named Gulmohar, which they will soon vacate. Much of the film is about Arun Batra, Kusum’s and her husband’s adopted son, and his struggle to reconcile his “roots” with his upbringing—he discovers that he is the biological son of a poor man who runs a chai stall rather than being the trueborn family heir. The idea of roots allows us to read the title _Gulmohar_ as a metaphor for the Batra family itself, threatened to be uprooted like a tree by the impending loss of their family home. Interestingly, for a film named after a tree, the only time the Gulmohar appears in the movie is in a flashback sequence: Kusum recounts her college years in [Pune](Q1538), where a blossoming queer romance is set against the backdrop of suspended Gulmohar petals and bicycle trails covered with red. There is a clear link between the Gulmohar and nostalgia: for what is both beloved and lost. Fittingly, Tamil poet [Kanimozhi](Q467231)’s poem _Never-ending Kiss_ (2002) makes an unfinished kiss a fixed, tangible part of the Gulmohar: “Carved in cold stone/ below the flaming/ gulmohar tree/ is an unfinished/ never-ending kiss.”[^51]

{% include embed/image.html src="hotstar1.png" caption="The Gulmohar’s only appearance in the eponymous movie is during a flashback sequence, where a queer romance is shown with the backdrop of the plant’s blossom." aspect="2.4" %}
{% include embed/image.html src="hotstar2.png" caption="The Gulmohar’s only appearance in the eponymous movie is during a flashback sequence, where a queer romance is shown with the backdrop of the plant’s blossom." aspect="2.4" %}
{% include embed/image.html src="hotstar3.png" caption="The Gulmohar’s only appearance in the eponymous movie is during a flashback sequence, where a queer romance is shown with the backdrop of the plant’s blossom." aspect="2.38" %}
{% include embed/image.html src="hotstar4.png" caption="The Gulmohar’s only appearance in the eponymous movie is during a flashback sequence, where a queer romance is shown with the backdrop of the plant’s blossom." aspect="2.41" %}
{% include embed/image.html src="hotstar5.png" caption="The Gulmohar’s only appearance in the eponymous movie is during a flashback sequence, where a queer romance is shown with the backdrop of the plant’s blossom." aspect="2.39" %}

In 1986, [Panna Naik](Q2763668) wrote the poem _Sub-tropics_ in [Pennsylvania](Q1400): “Uprooting a tropical plant/ I replanted it/ in this cold alien land/ and determined it shall survive.”[^52] In the next line, however, comes the “yet”: “When the whole earth here erupts hot summer roses/ my eyes cry red for gulmohar.” The Indian subject moves to the west and the Gulmohar tree—which the colonial powers introduced in the subcontinent only a century-and-a-half ago—now becomes a marker of her own culture. She attempts to make the plant take root in this foreign land, to bring with her a part of her own cultural roots, but the attempt fails, just as the colonial attempt of its naturalization in Britain never fully fruits. The plants’ trajectory—from its origin in Madagascar, botanical identification in Mauritius, arrival in the Indian subcontinent as part of a colonial experiment, and its cultural adoption to becoming a symbol that represents multitudes of social reform, nostalgia, desire, longing and even the idea of “Indian-ness”—seems both like a journey of leaving and arriving home. In the last stanza of _Sub-tropics_, Naik considers returning to the subcontinent, but the closing, separately indented line ponders, “But where is home?” The Gulmohar, a tree from Madagascar that makes a home for itself in the Indian subcontinent, would perhaps have the most fitting answer. 

{% include embed/image.html src="wc:M._E._Russell_F-8_(6B-H968)_-_Royal_Poinciana_Tree_Amidst_Majestic_Royal_Palms,_Fort_Myers,_Florida_front.jpg" caption="The Gulmohar finds an unlikely home in the tropical regions of Florida, where it is called the Royal Poinciana. Image credit: Wikimedia Commons." aspect="1.54" %}

[^1]: Plants of the World Online. “Delonix Regia (Bojer Ex Hook.) Raf., Plants of the World Online, Kew Science,” n.d. https://powo.science.kew.org/taxon/urn:lsid:ipni.org:names:491231-1.
[^2]: Wharton, Thomas. Letter to Sir William Jackson Hooker from Bath, Jamaica. Library and Archives at Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Directors' Correspondence 71/418, April 9, 1856. https://plants.jstor.org/stable/10.5555/al.ap.visual.kmdc1611; Singapore Agri-Horticultural Society. Appendix A to Annual Report of the Singapore Agri-Horticultural Society (Singapore: Straits Times Press, 1866.) https://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/bibliography/135433.
[^3]: Hooker, William Jackson, Sir. “Botanical Information,” Hooker’s Journal of Botany and Kew Garden Miscellany, Vol. VIII, 1865: 312–313. https://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/item/6326#page/321/mode/1up.
[^4]: Schiebinger, Londa L. “Introduction,” Plants and Empire: Colonial Bioprospecting in the Atlantic World (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2004). http://ci.nii.ac.jp/ncid/BA70897084.
[^5]: Bouton, Louis. Letter to Sir William Jackson Hooker from Port Louis, Mauritius. Library and Archives at Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Directors' Correspondence 53/10, October 7, 1831. https://plants.jstor.org/stable/10.5555/al.ap.visual.kdcas1052.
[^6]: Telfair, Charles. Letter to Sir William Jackson Hooker from Port Louis, Mauritius. Library and Archives at Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Directors' Correspondence 43/156, April 2, 1828. https://plants.jstor.org/stable/10.5555/al.ap.visual.kmdc1832?searchUri=si%3D26%26filter%3Dfree_text%26Query%3D%2528ResourceType%253A%2522letters%2B%2528correspondence%2529%2522%2529%2BPoinciana%2Bregia%26so%3Dyear%2Bdesc.
[^7]: Telfair, Charles. Letter to Sir William Jackson Hooker from Port Louis, Mauritius. Library and Archives at Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Directors' Correspondence 52/25, December 24, 1828. https://plants.jstor.org/stable/10.5555/al.ap.visual.kdcas933?searchUri=si%3D76%26filter%3Dfree_text%26Query%3D%2528ResourceType%253A%2522letters%2B%2528correspondence%2529%2522%2529%2BBojer%26so%3Dyear%2Bdesc.
[^8]: Curtis, Williams and Hooker, William Jackson, Sir. “Poinciana Regia. Superb Poinciana,” Curtis’s Botanical Magazine, Vol. 56, 1829: 2884. https://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/item/14216#page/28/mode/1up.
[^9]: Curtis, Williams and Sir William Jackson Hooker. https://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/item/14216#page/28/mode/1up.
[^10]: Hooker, William Jackson, Sir. “The Late Mr. Barclay”. Botanical Miscellany, Vol. 2, 1831: 123. https://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/page/5520513
[^11]: Hooker, William Jackson, Sir. “The Late Mr. Barclay,” Botanical Miscellany, Vol. 2, 1831: 122. https://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/page/5520513.
[^12]: Bojer, Wenceslaus. Letter to Sir William Jackson Hooker from Port Louis, Mauritius. Library and Archives at Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Directors' Correspondence 58/8, July 27, 1833. 
[^13]: Spach, Édouard. Histoire naturelle des végétaux Phanérogames Phanérogames,1834: 105–106. https://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/item/97949#page/119/mode/1up.
[^14]: Paxton, Joseph, Sir. Paxton's Magazine of Botany (London; Orr and Smith [etc.]), Vol. 3, 1837: 87. https://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/page/48265893.
[^15]: Bojer, W. Hortus Mauritianus :ou enumeration des plantes, exotiques et indigenes, qui croissent a l’Ile Maurice, disposees d’apres la methode naturelle (Maurice: Imprimerie d’Aimé Mamarot et Compagnie, 1837). https://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/page/6208650.
[^16]: Spry, Henry H. and Agricultural & Horticultural Society of India. “Letter From Professor Royle, M.D, F.R.S., to James Cosmo Melville, Esq. Secretary at the India House, containing observations on the introduction into India of the useful and ornamental Plants and Seeds of Europe and North America.” Suggestions received by the Agricultural & Horticultural Society of India for extending the cultivation and introduction of useful and ornamental plants: With a view to the improvement of the agricultural and commercial resources of India (Calcutta: Bishop's College Press, 1841). https://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/item/75336#page/177/mode/1up.
[^17]: Herbert, Eugenia W. Flora’s Empire: British Gardens in India (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2011), 147.
[^18]: Graham, John. A Catalogue of the Plants Growing in Bombay and its Vicinity (Bombay: Bombay Government Press, 1839), 20. https://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/page/31388701.
[^19]: Spry, Henry H. and Agricultural & Horticultural Society of India. “Letter From Doctor Browne, Private Secretary to the Honorable Governor of Bombay, to Dr. Spry, Secretary of the Agricultural & Horticultural Society of India.” Suggestions received by the Agricultural & Horticultural Society of India for extending the cultivation and introduction of useful and ornamental plants: With a view to the improvement of the agricultural and commercial resources of India. (Calcutta: Bishop's College Press, 1841), 32. https://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/item/75336#page/48/mode/1up.
[^20]: Voight, J. O. Hortus Suburbanus Calcuttensis: A catalogue of the plants which have been cultivated in the Hon. East India company’s botanical garden, Calcutta, and in the Serampore botanical garden from the beginning of both establishments (1786 and 1800) to the end of August 1841 (Calcutta, Bishop's College Press, 1845), 245. https://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/item/188209#page/279/mode/1up.
[^21]: Griffith, William. “Introduction: Letters of late William Griffith to Dr. R Wight.” Itinerary notes of plants collected in the Khasyah and Bootan Mountains 1837-38, in Affghanistan and neighbouring countries 1839-1841 (Calcutta: Bishop's College Press, 1848), xli. https://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/page/43061734.
[^22]: “2002 - Dapuri.” Royal Botanic Garden Edinburgh. Accessed March 25, 2025. https://www.rbge.org.uk/science-and-conservation/library-and-archives/plant-fungi-humanities/inverleith-house/2002-dapuri/.
[^23]: Arnold, David. “Plant Capitalism and Company Science: The Indian Career of Nathaniel Wallich,” Modern Asian Studies 42, no. 5 (2008): 916. http://www.jstor.org/stable/20488047.
[^24]: Arnold, David. “Plant Capitalism and Company Science: The Indian Career of Nathaniel Wallich,” Modern Asian Studies 42, no. 5 (2008): 925. http://www.jstor.org/stable/20488047.
[^25]: Thomas, Annamma and Thomas, T. M. Kerala Immigrants in America: A Sociological Study of the St. Thomas Christians (Simons Printers, 1984). 
[^26]: Schiebinger, Londa L. “Linguistic Imperialism,” Plants and Empire: Colonial Bioprospecting in the Atlantic World (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2004). http://ci.nii.ac.jp/ncid/BA70897084.
[^27]: Graham, John. A Catalogue of the Plants Growing in Bombay and its Vicinity (Bombay: Bombay Government Press, 1839), 61. https://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/page/31388701.
[^28]: “Peacock Flower (Caesalpinia Pulcherrima),” iNaturalist. Accessed October 12, 2024. https://www.inaturalist.org/taxa/60439-Caesalpinia-pulcherrima.
[^29]: Miller, William. A Dictionary of English Names of Plants: Applied in England and among English-speaking people to cultivated and wild plants, trees, and shrubs (London: John Murray, 1884), 104. https://hdl.handle.net/2027/hvd.hc21h4?urlappend=%3Bseq=116%3Bownerid=27021597765425883-128.
[^30]: Nairne, A. K. “Elementary Botany of the Bombay Presidency,” The Journal of the Bombay Natural History Society, Vol. 4, 1889, 273. https://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/page/2070296.
[^31]: Merriam-Webster.com. Dictionary, s.v. “mohur.” Accessed August 20, 2024, https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/mohur. 
[^32]: Orwell, George. Burmese Days (New York: Harper & Brothers, 1934; reprint, Oxford University Press, 2021). 
[^33]: Birdwood, George C. M. “Advertisement: A Detailed List of Europe, Fruit, Kitchen Garden, and Flower Seeds, sold by the Agri-Horticultural Society of Western India, Bombay,” Report on the Government Central Museum, and on the Agricultural and Horticultural Society of Western India for 1863 (Byculla: The Education Society’s Press, 1864), V. https://hdl.handle.net/2027/wau.39352059980664?urlappend=%3Bseq=187.
[^34]: Cleghorn, Hugh. “Catalogue of the Plants in the Public Garden, Bangalore, June 1861,” The Forests and Gardens of South India (London: W.H. Allen & Co., 1861), 348. https://hdl.handle.net/2027/hvd.32044102820784?urlappend=%3Bseq=406%3Bownerid=27021597764430721-414. Bulger, George E. Notes of a tour from Bangalore to Calcutta; Thence to Delhi, and, subsequently, to British Sikkim during the early part of 1867 (Secunderabad: Regimental Press, 1869), 9. https://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89097543896?urlappend=%3Bseq=21%3Bownerid=13510798896017675-25.
[^35]: Watson, J. Forbes. Index to the Native and Scientific Names of Indian and other Eastern Economic Plants and Products (London, Trübner & Co., 1868), 175. https://hdl.handle.net/2027/uc1.31175002453887?urlappend=%3Bseq=185%3Bownerid=13510798902687044-191. Kirtikar, K. R. “Indian Flowers,” The Journal of the Bombay Natural History Society, Vol. 7, 1892, 514. https://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/page/30219405.
[^36]: Piddington, Henry. An English Index to the Plants of India (Calcutta: Baptist Mission Press, and sold by Messrs. Thacker and Co., 1832), 71. https://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/page/22566864.
[^37]: Flowersofindia.net. “Caesalpinia Pulcherrima - Peacock Flower,” 2024. Accessed August 20, 2024. https://www.flowersofindia.net/catalog/slides/Peacock%20Flower.html.
[^38]: Chakrabarti, Arindam. “The Aesthetics of the Resplendent Sapphire: Erotic Devotion in Rūpa Gosvāmin’s Ujjvalanīlamaṇi,”The Bloomsbury Research Handbook of Indian Aesthetics and the Philosophy of Art (London: Bloomsbury Publishing, 2016), 111. https://doi.org/10.5040/9781474219006.
[^39]: Venkatestvaran, T. K. "VI. Radha-Krishna Bhajanas of South India: A Phenomenological, Theological, and Philosophical Study," In Krishna, edited by Milton Singer (Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press, 1966), 139–172. https://doi.org/10.1515/9780824885878-008.
[^40]: “The first poem on Ekushey,” The Dhaka Tribune, February 18, 2021. https://www.dhakatribune.com/bangladesh/238883/the-first-poem-on-ekushey.
[^41]: Ileas, Ilu. “The story of the first poem on Ekhushey,” The Business Standard, Bangladesh, February 21, 2022. https://www.tbsnews.net/bangladesh/amar-ekushey/story-first-poem-ekhushey-373867.
[^42]: United Nations. “International Mother Language Day.” Accessed August 20, 2024. https://www.un.org/en/observances/mother-language-day.
[^43]: Sen, Mandakranta. After the Last Kiss. Translated by Arunava Sinha (Gurgaon, India: HarperCollins India, 2014). https://www.poetryinternational.com/en/poets-poems/poems/poem/103-24801_THE-STORY-OF-THE-ARJUN-AND-THE-KRISHNACHURA#.
[^44]: Thapar, Romila. “The Theory of Aryan Race and India: History and Politics,” Social Scientist 24, no. 1/3 (1996): 3–29. https://doi.org/10.2307/3520116.
[^45]: Krishnan, Kavita. “Sacred Spaces, Secular Norms and Women’s Rights,” Economic and Political Weekly 41, no. 27/28 (2006): 2969–2971. http://www.jstor.org/stable/4418425.
[^46]: Ramanathan, S. Devata. Prithiva Pictures, 1978, 1:52:08 – 1:55:50. https://youtu.be/VKOKO85aWqM?si=mjMQMRMY4Q32zQFq&t=6728.
[^47]: Desai, Dhirubai. Narad Leela. NH Studioz, 1972. 40:00 – 44:50. https://youtu.be/2a0Hd7MG8GM?si=24mDeHu2mAdW5qkh&t=2400.
[^48]: Ahsan, Syed Ali. “The Krishnachura Tree,” Mahfil 2, no. 2 (1965): 37–37. http://www.jstor.org/stable/43645746.
[^49]: Mahakud, Pravasini, K. Satchidanandan, and Rajendra Mishra. “Forget, Forget,” Indian Literature 63, no. 3: 311. 2019: 88–89. https://www.jstor.org/stable/27276400.
[^50]: Chittella, Rahul V. Gulmohar. Star Studios, 2023.
[^51]: Kanimozhi. “Never-Ending Kiss,” Indian Literature 46, no. 1, 207, 2002: 89–89. http://www.jstor.org/stable/23344502.
[^52]: Naik, Panna. “SUB-TROPICS.” Journal of South Asian Literature 21, no. 1, 1986: 62. http://www.jstor.org/stable/40872820.
